Come to the table. Yeah.
Exactly, Stace.
Okay.
They didn't get our reporter.
They didn't.
Long time after.
Camilla, and you'll get Dan Rosewall.
Okay, the new man.
Yeah.
Okay, coming back. Right. Mr. McCormick.
Yes, Mr. Chairman.
We've got two Mr. McCormick's. Um,
so we've got five minutes. Just, while people are sitting here, very
helpful, these are su- short submissions.
Every member of the select committee has read these sub- your submission
diligently.
That's right.
So we don't need to have, someone read it to us because you're just wasting
your time, and I don't mean that in a derogatory way.
I mean it in a way that often members will wanna ask questions,
and the more that you spend
talking or reading,
it's less time for questions.
So what I'd suggest to you, and I'm talking to the room actually and anyone
online, just summarize the very c- couple of the most
important points, and then we can do... ask some questions. All right?
Right. The time is yours.
Yeah. Good morning. Thank you, Andrew. My name is Mike McCormick.
I've been using firearms for a good forty-plus years, and I think that
if more people were trained in the use of firearms, it would actually be a public
good that would enhance, public safety.
It's a great challenging discipline, both mentally and physically,
and, I think it's character building.
Now, Section 4A of this act talks about,
firearms ownership being a privilege.
I think that's a direct contradiction of the Treaty of Waitangi.
We have-- Even if Parliament shied away last year from establishing the principles
of the Treaty of Waitangi, we're now left with the direct wording.
You have in the treaty, you have, undisturbed possession of forestry, fisheries
and estates. Estates is firearms, of course.
Um, but if you take the Māori, translation of
taonga, that principle of it being a treasure.
So there's no greater treasure than the possession and use of state-of-the-art
self-preservation technology as being the most basic, fundamental human right.
Um,
so from that, I get to the point where, I think the
bill is incredibly long and wordy, and it's some four hundred
sections or something. I would reduce it down to twenty-six words
of any New Zealand citizen over the age of eighteen who is
not subject to a firearms prohibition order may possess and use any arms
and ammunition. Now, what we've done there is we've flipped the script.
So instead of focusing on a million odd people, when you run a regulatory regime
like we do now, you've got two hundred and fifty thousand licensed firearms owners,
plus their family members, plus their children, plus their mates who use their
guns. You're targeting a million people.
Whereas if we focused on firearms prohibition orders, you'd be targeting people on
the national gang list and then people who've been convicted of violent crimes.
So maybe you're talking twenty or thirty thousand people, then you'd be far more
effective, because I want effective legislation that's actually gonna deliver
better public safety outcomes. So,
then we get down to by focusing on the firearms prohibition orders also too, you're
giving people their day in court, you're giving them the presumption of innocence
and these, these are fundamental to, to our civil
society. And you'd have a ten times the enforcement factor, right?
Because you're focusing on a lot smaller group of people who have actually caused
harm to others.
Um,
so then we get on to also there's a-- the purpose of the bill is to
promote the use of firearms, and I endorse this.
It's a great idea, and I would urge the committee to recommend a budget be set
aside for establishing ranges up and down the country to
actually, with the equipment for using those ranges to
develop a much healthier attitude to firearms, to demystify
it and to educate people. So, I think that covers.
You've all read my submission. Do you have any questions for me?
Right. Um, Mr. Bates.
Thanks, Chair. So just so I'm clear,
Mike, the intention of your rewrite recommendation
is the entire bill getting rewritten to that?
Yes. You could reduce it to twenty-six words.
Okay.
Yes.
So my supplementary question to that is,
so I get the point you're trying to make and appreciate, the,
ability people should have to be able to use firearms in New Zealand for legitimate
purposes.
I suppose the challenge I'd have with doing that is that then you, you'd have to
issue a whole lot of prohibition orders to people who clearly wouldn't
be,
appropriate to have access to a firearm at the moment.
Now, whether that be for the examples you've used, like gang membership, et
cetera, whether that be for, mental
health, challenges or concerns, and
I, I wonder if that, would at all be practical.
No, the burden of proof is on the state.
Before you deny me of my, my, my, my fundamental human
rights, you, you need to provide evidence that I'm causing harm.
So if you have to issue a whole lot of firearms prohibition orders, the police have
already got the national gang list.
So I take, I take the point you're trying to make, but we don't give you the
right to drive a car and then work out whether or not you've got the ability to
have a license. We, we do take people through a process before they have
access to driving a car.
Yeah, right. So yeah, that's what I'm saying.
So if we funded ranges up and down the country, we'd, we'd educate a whole lot of
people. I agree. I accept your submission. That's a great idea.
Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you. Um, for your submission this morning.
Oh, okay.
Your five minutes is up.
Thank you, Andrew. I'd love to chat longer.
Thank you. Now we've got another, Mr. Mc- McCormick.
Good morning.
Uh, good morning. Thank you all for sitting here to hear my submission.
My name is, Connor. I've been actively shooting and participating in sport
shooting and hunting and collecting for about ten years, and quite actively
involved. I think to summarize the three main points of my submission, which I
thank you all for taking the time to read, is that the Arms Bill is very long
and very complicated, and the three main focuses should be: we should remove the
register entirely, we should, reinstate the possession
and use of semi-automatic firearms for anyone that fits the definition of fit and
proper person, and we should ensure that the bill-Uh, completely
separates the police from any administration of the day-to-day operation of the
Arms Act. Uh, so when I say that, I don't mean that they should have no
involvement. The bill outlines quite well the chief executive should be separate,
and that they work closely with the police.
Um, there's a subsection there, I believe it's Clause 300, which covers that the
police, uh... well, that the, Arms- the new Arms Act
administration would be an agency of the police.
I don't believe this promotes, the genuine independence.
I think that the police do an excellent job of enforcing the law and pr-
prosecuting people generally when they break them, and that the administration of
the Act to encourage compliance and, improvements for public
safety should be worked through an administration point of view and they should
have a close working relationship at the top, but not day-to-day examples.
I'll give you a case for why the registry should be removed from this case.
Um, one is that the registry puts a huge amount of cost of
resources and time, both of people and money, on tracing
serial numbers from inani- inanimate objects where I think the previous Arms Act
had it right. Um, that Arms Act was also ninety-six clauses, not the four hundred
we have today, where it focused much more heavily on the person that uses firearms
and not, tracking particular firearms.
And you've got a ten-round mag and you've got a
semi-auto, those are used very safely and appropriately for many years,
before we had the, before... yeah, meant they were used very safely and
effectively for many years, and that the owner should always be on the state to
prove that somebody is not fit and proper, and not placing the burden of proof on,
innocent people. Um, and you also have to consider that with
every level of complexity, there is more, issue with maintaining
consistency and accuracy with any register.
Uh, put aside the cost element, which I think on its own is enough, along with the,
the, the burden of proof. Um, I had a case where I submitted some paperwork to the
police for putting pistol items on my license, and the permit number had
three items on it. The police told me that they wouldn't, do it, that I'd have
to enter it myself. And when I went home, they'd put four items from a three-item
permit, on the register. It took quite a bit of talking and
convincing to say, "Actually, the fourth item you put on there doesn't exist.
I have the permit number. That was a human error." If you compound that over the
course of years, months, that that register may be in place along with the cost,
you would lose any form of accuracy and any, any minor benefit that you
may, on a very excluded and isolated incident,
prove that it has benefit would be lost due to inaccuracy alone.
Um, I just think, yeah, that those would be my three, major points.
Remove the register, bring back the semi-autos, and, make sure the police are
completely separate from the administration. Uh, thank you.
So can I just, um... You're saying that they had four items, and it took...
it was a lot of difficulty getting removed, removing the fourth.
Y- yes.
What... Why was that? You know, there's obviously an obvious,
obvious answer, but-
Yes
... were they wanting to, for you to prove there wasn't a fourth?
Uh, what was sort of the process?
Well, it's, it's, I guess, the process was that, and you have to,
because of how the register was rushed in its implementation and the scope of it,
it required everyone to call the register to, to deal with them on a
day-to-day basis to add items to your name.
The IT infrastructure doesn't exist.
Um, even if it did, it probably wouldn't be secure.
Um, so you had to call and they put the keystrokes in themselves.
Um, and so when I called them up, they said, "This is the permit," and they
outlined what the... They said there were four items. There was only three.
There was a conversion kit. There was, and two pistols.
The conversion kit is classed as a firearm, but they believed that that conversion
kit also had other parts which made it the fourth-
Right
... fully functioning item.
Right.
And you're trying to explain this over the phone.
Right. Mr. Stevens.
Oh, but, and just, just staying on this, and then they gave you contradictory
advice. Is that what you're saying?
Yes. So when I went-
They said-
Yes.
You had to enter it, but then they entered it.
They said, they said, "Yes, you can take... Here, here's your permit.
Um, here's the permit number. This is the permit to possess.
Uh, take it in and to the register and put it in." So I, when I went to do that, I
noticed that the items that I was trying to put in were already there.
And they said, "Oh, no, we do that for you." I said, "Well, I was told that I, I
didn't have to do it-
Right
... that it's my obligation," which caused the rather long,
conversation on the phone to try and prove that something doesn't exist.
Yeah.
Which is rather difficult. It, it was eventually solved, but the, the problem is
that-
That was out of trouble.
Yeah.
All right.
Thank you.
Thank you for your submission.
Okay. Thank you for your time.
Now, we've got Mr. Fisken. Here we are. Good.
Good morning.
All right, when you're ready.
Yeah, yeah. Mr.-
Oh.
The floor is yours.
Brilliant. Well, good morning, select committee, and thank you all for your time
this morning to hear my submission.
I'd just like to firstly thank the Honorable Minister Nicole McKee and her research
staff for the time and dedication that it took to bring this bill to the House.
And I'd also like to commend this government for recognizing the need to repeal and
replace the Arms Act 1983.
While I'm supportive of the intent of this bill, I firmly believe that there needs
to be a number of amendments made to ensure that this legislation will be fit for
purpose, protecting both public safety and the rights of law-abiding
licensed firearm owners.
For my first point, I strongly support reintroducing lawful ownership
of centerfire semi-automatic firearms with detachable magazines,
such as AR-15s and other modern sporting rifle platforms,
for legitimate sporting purposes.
And I'd recommend that this be done by creating an endorsement system similar to
the current B endorsement that we have for pistols.
Uh, I also recommend that limited capacity semi-automatic centerfire
rifles with non-detachable magazines, for example, the Norinco
SKS or M1 Grand, be available on a standard A
category license. Um, now I appreciate that most of you may not be familiar with
those firearm types. I've actually got a reference document which I can provide to
the committee staff afterwards.
Um, additionally, I believe this should be expanded to include modern sporting
rifles which have been permanently modified or manufactured to have a fixed
ten-round magazine.
Now, this will actually help to increase public safety by assisting with
re-legitimizing what are currently gray market firearms, and those are
prohibited firearms that are unaccounted for following the twenty nineteen
amnesty and buyback scheme. Additionally, this will also help with
restoring some of the rights of licensed firearm owners that were unjustifiably
taken through a knee-jerk reaction by the last
government.Moving on to the topic of the firearms registry,
I ultimately very firmly believe that the existing registry of A category
firearms must be abolished and its existing data be destroyed.
And we can see from overseas examples such as Canada, which has a general, which
had a general firearms registry from 1995 to 2012,
that it had no effect on reducing crime, it was highly inaccurate, and ended
up costing Canadian taxpayers more than a billion dollars.
Additionally, there are security and privacy concerns.
In this country, we've seen a number of high-profile data leaks, most recently
with Manage My Health, and I hold a very grave concern that
when, not if, a matter of when a registry leak occurs, it will
enable criminals to be able to identify and prioritize burglary
victims, thus endangering licensed firearm owners, their families, and the
community as a whole.
In closing, I support the direction of this bill, but I urge the committee to
carefully consider my recommendations and ensure that the resulting legislation is
effective, fair, and reasonable. Thank you. I'll now take some questions.
Right. Wide-ranging submission. Now, first one I've got is Mr. Stevenson.
Thanks, Matt. I'm just... One of the other things you, in your submission
you support is the Firearms, Licensing Review
Committee.
Yes.
Why do you think that's an important body to establish?
Well, currently we have a system where should, a licensed
firearms owner, end up in a legal difficulty and potentially face
revocation, the only option is essentially judicial review through the district
courts. Um, now that is an extremely expensive,
task, an expense which most licensed firearm owners simply can't front up
to.
Yes.
Not to mention, I, I know it can take more than a year to actually get a
day in court for a judicial review as well.
So when you consider the time and the money, it's, only really an avenue
that's open to a very small percentage of the two hundred and thirty thousand
licensed firearm owners. I, I think this review would make, justice
more accessible and faster for everyone.
Okay.
Can I ask a question, um-
Yes
... because you're a relatively young person.
Yes.
Um, you're, you're advocating the, retaining the age of 16.
That's correct.
And you, you got your license at 16, I see.
That's right, mm-hmm.
Um, just take us through the process of, of getting that license.
What did you have to go through? Did you, like, did you get arranged?
Did you-
Yeah. So at the time I was already, a member of the Invercargill Pistol
Club, and I had been for a number of years.
Um, I had to do a application, which was a paper version at the time.
Things have changed significantly since then.
Um, I needed to have two referees, one being a next of kin, one being someone who
knows me well that is older than 20.
For that, I believe we used the pistol club president.
Um, I needed to have an in-person interview done at my home, where they also
inspected my storage facilities.
Um, I've no doubt they would've also done, a background check and criminal
record check, as well as to look for any other information that may or may not
have been held on me at the time. Um, all up, the process of, if I
recall correctly, took about four months.
Um, but like I'm, I'm remembering back to 2019, so that's-
Yeah. Yeah. Cool. All right. Hey, thank you.
Thanks.
Um, that's a good submission.
Uh, thank you very much.
All right.
Thanks very much.
Now, members, the next person is caught in traffic,
so I'm hoping that, Jonathan Boston's here.
I'm here.
Yeah.
It's Professor, isn't it?
Well, if you wish.
Emeritus, emeritus now.
Well, yeah, well, that makes it even more grander.
Well,
thank you very much for the opportunity to make an oral submission, to this
committee. Uh, I, I will take it as read that you have read
my, my submission, so I'll just make two quick points.
Uh, in my view, the organizational form,
that is proposed for this new arms regulator
is,
neither desirable nor justified, a- and I've recommended,
an alternative structure. Uh, and secondly, I have
serious concerns of a constitutional nature and a practical nature,
about the risks associated with the
minister responsible
making, in effect, the appointment of the,
chief executive of the arms, regulator.
Um, so, I've set out in, in my
submission why I have those concerns.
Uh, and the basic point is that if the aim of this, process is
to enhance, public trust and confidence, then I
think the institutional arrangements and the appointment
process will have precisely the opposite
consequence and will place the minister, in a
potentially difficult, embarrassing position.
Right. Good. And first question is from, Ms. Vanusi Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Professor Boston.
Um, I wanted to ask a question about something you didn't mention, but perhaps you
have an opinion on, in terms of the minister's powers.
So the minister also has significant discretionary powers in terms
of the interpretation of what I would consider key, sections of the
bill.
Right.
Um, in your view, are those an appropriate use of
secondary powers?
So forgive me, but I haven't studied all aspects of the bills.
Uh, m- my principal concern was with the organizational
arrangements and the minister's, involvement in the appointment
of the arms regulator. Um, as a, as a general comment,
I, I would have reservations about ministers having significant
discretionary powers in, in this kind of field.
I mean, one of the reasons for delegating
responsibilities to, either independent or
quasi-independent entities, is to ensure
that, key decisions are, are made,
by people who are deemed to have relevant expertise
and, and distance from the government of the day.
So it's not that we shouldn't have discretionary powers in some circumstances
but-Um, I think they should be limited in the interest
actually of the minister as well. Because if the minister's exercising
discretionary powers, then of course the minister can be under enormous pressure
a- and, and can be exposed to, a
variety of risks.
Okay, we've got a couple more questions. First one, Todd. Thanks.
Second one, Todd Simpson.
Thanks for being here.
Mm.
Just so I'm clear, so I'm just with that re- in relation to the arms regulator-
Yeah
... so you, I think you're saying if you, if the goal of, of true independence from
the police is what's wanted, then there are different ways of doing
it, like a Crown entity, like the independent...
Is this basically what you're saying, there could be better ways to make sure that-
Yes
... it's actually truly independent?
If you wanted full-
Yeah, which is the stated, stated aim of the bill.
Yeah
... independence. But I, I'm suspicious about the extent to which you could
realistically have complete independence in a context where
the police are going to be holding a lot of the information that the arms regulator
will need.
So, you know, the current model at the moment
i- in which, in which the entity is e- essentially a business unit within the
police-
Yeah
... is in fact, as I understand it, the model which is normal internationally, and
there are good reasons, there are good reasons for that.
But if you wanted to have additional separation, then it seems to me
something like a departmental agency would be, would be
preferable. I appreciate that under the,
Public Service Act, technically the police aren't a department-
Mm
... so technically you can't have a d- departmental agency, but I...
that, that could be dealt with-
Mo- that's the kind of model that you're thinking of
... that could be dealt with through technical changes to legislation.
Yeah.
Right. Mr. Kel Bates.
Thanks, Chair. And flowing on from that, in your 1B
recommendation, other than that
enabling of a public service commissioner to be the appointer of the chief
executive as opposed directly the minister-
Mm
... what other practical implementat- practical
changes would 1B, create?
Well, I mean, the critical issue here is who should appoint the arms regulator,
and I'm making the case that, it would be
preferable to have, the arms
regulator appointed in a normal-
Yes
... process of the kind that we use for appointing departmental chief
executives or the heads of departmental agencies.
Uh, the model that's proposed in this legislation is extremely unusual, and I think
constitutionally risky.
So, so I appreciate that. So I'm asking-
Yes
... other than changing essentially who appoints the chief executive-
... w- would there be any other practical implementation,
changes if your recommendation-
Yes. Well, I mean-
... 1B was adopted
... I mean, among the changes that would be inevitable if you did that
would be that the minister would not have a role in, determining or
influencing the terms and conditions of appointment.
Yeah.
Anything else in there?
Well, there may be some other things. I'm sorry.
I, I'd have to-
No, no, it's fine. No, no
... think that through carefully.
Sure. Yeah, yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you very much, Charles.
All right.
Of course you've been here before, but thank you very much for your-
Yes. My pleasure
... input.
And I wish you well.
All right.
Thank you. Thank you.
And now, are you Mr. Corey Baker?
Yes. Can, apologize for being-
No, no, no.
No.
Uh, we... No. Fine.
All right. Thank you.
Thanks, Professor.
Thank you.
I'm just glad you made it.
Yeah, me too.
Chairman, is the volume on your earpiece, can you turn the volume up or is it just
fixed? Can we turn this up a bit?
Yeah.
Yeah, we're gonna tr- we'll have a look. Okay, cool. All right.
Good morning.
Um, we've all read your submission, so just-
Oh, I would-
... summar- summarize your key points and then-
Yeah, so, the submission was, I had problems actually
submitting my larger file, so it's not representative of-
Okay. Well, y- you talk-
I had technical issues-
Yeah
... when it was originally, so it will be short and odd.
Um,
first speaker had the same concerns as myself.
It's about the, the executive powers and how
it's separated from the minister
to, it's essentially the processes of how the
appointment of, the authority is taking place.
Um, like first speaker said, it's,
it is quite a, it's a,
constitutionally it is a bit of a stretch because it's, it's, failing due
process. Um,
this will probably be repeated through the day, so I know I've only got my
five-minute allocation, so I want to keep it brief.
That's why you, you talk about what you think is important. Yeah.
Uh, I, I, I think that the authority should s- have some
branch of,
public representation through like a,
through like a democratic election,
within the body of the firearms holders.
Um, I think it's a really crucial aspect of,
it, it's a, it's a crucial, aspect of having a
holistic approach to the, the, the firearms regulation as a
whole. Um, I think it, the net benefit for education,
socialization, making sure that,
firearms license holders
are so- it sounds odd, but socializing, and it's a really good stepping
stone of getting, people in together.
It's also, it also addresses kind of, mental health
risk and factors and, you know, it, it, it brings people
from rural communities into a kind of,
not a union, but essentially a, a body that's representative.
And I think it might be quite handy for the regulator as well to have that kind
of voice representative in the processes.
Um, one thing I wanted to briefly just, make mention is
that there is a,
s- Section 69, dash 1,
it- it's talking about the, a proper person to hold firearms.
The language around it's really kind of iffy.
Um-And it also leaves a lot of discretion to
the executive, which I think that needs to be a bit more
robust in its, in its legal wording.
Um, the, the one aspect that I wanted to address with it though is that there's a,
a conflict between terms. So,
it makes reference to protection order, including temporary
protection orders.
And I just needed to make note that in, section
one it says that, I think it's dash e,
wherever I've got it here.
Yeah, the, the section... I think it's section 60...
Is it, 69-1 and,
68 clash with each other. So one, one makes
reference to the prote- temporary protection order being outside of the scope
of refusal of the application of a license.
And then the second make men- makes mention that the temporary protection
orders are inc- included inside the, the
scope of refusal.
Um, the only reason that I have issue with this is-
Yeah
... one firsthand experience with it.
Um,
but it's... I understand from safety protocol and safety
measures that it, it needs to be, presented on the
forefront. But
the,
the judicial process needs to be completed and we...
The threshold of having proof and also innocent before
proven guilty is like a cornerstone of our principle, and
the protection order falls underneath that threshold.
The temporary protection order, a TPO, falls well within,
well under that threshold of...
So I, I think just as a, um...
To address that, it just needs to be, kind of revised or removed
from the,
from the list of,
yeah, the, the, the list of,
legal denials for a licensee holder.
Um, th- on that as well, just with the, the gang
affiliate and the... Because that is the one of the most dramatic
shifts. So I've got no affiliation, I don't, I
oppose gangs having firearms and...
But it becomes a fun- a constitutional kind of breach of the bill of rights, I,
I believe, and it's also a watering down of a, a fundamental pi- pillar that
we have and a protection for the public.
So, that's something that I'm,
yeah, I'm, I'm kind of torn between it.
I think it needs a little bit more of a look, only because of the
executive powers gives a subject of purview to,
to the threshold of who can and who can't.
The,
the, the good thing with the new proposals is that, is that there's a really
robust,
legal strengthening of our, of consequences of breaches
of, of
firearm misappropriation. And I just feel that that's a
strong enough legal,
co-
that's a strong enough legal kind of,
fence around anything that needs to be protected.
If,
if a, if a gang member has any of the,
listed breaches that puts them outside of the scope of being able
to apply for, the firearms license itself, I think
that's a strong enough threshold.
If they're law-abiding
and they don't have anything against their,
any, any ch- any prior existing charges, I think it might be a,
yeah, I, I think it would be a constitutional issue.
Right. Hey, thank you. Um, we're a bit over time.
Yes.
Can I just ask-
Yeah
... can I just ask on your very first point.
Mm-hmm.
Are... That representation of firearms owners or holders-
Mm-hmm
... are you suggesting that they should have a right to be
on, sitting on the agency's board-
I-
... or just as a reference group?
I think it's really important that either they have a right to be, part
of it or part of the process of how the executive is
appointed. So I noticed that one of the prerequisites is,
that they... it's, it's lawyers that are involved in it, so,
those that are, sworn into the bar.
Right.
And I, I think it can become quite litigious as opposed to-
Right
... it's losing its pract- practicality, and I think you need
that kind of, boots on the ground representation-
Yeah
... and, and kind of committee. It's, it's really valuable.
Like-
Sure
... hunters have, invaluable experience, farmers have an-
Yeah
... insight that's second to none. Um, but yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you. Very good submission.
It was a bit different from what you wrote, but-
Yeah, yeah. It's good. Yeah
... but, but very good. I-
Thank you
... I just compliment you on your submi- your, talk today. Thank you.
Yeah. No worries. Thank you.
Right. Now we're gonna go to, Mr.
East, is it?
On,
on Zoom.
On Zoom. Are you
there?
Good morning.
How you going? We can't see you, but, that's...
Oh, there you are. Good. Hey, we've got five minutes with you.
We've read your submission. Um, looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Uh, good morning. Um,
I began my submission
with reference to two important clauses
right at near the beginning of the bill,
which I'd
like to seeWell, they are in the draft.
I hope they survive the process. But I would like the
committee to bear these in mind while they are listening,
today. And
but in particular, Clause 4A, that the possession and use of
arms is a privilege.
This is the exact opposite of the often quoted
right to bear arms
in the American Constitution.
There is no right to bear arms.
The, the preamble to that particular
part, amendment begins by saying, "For the
formation of a well-formed mili- militia," or words to that
effect.
Um, that context is usually completely forgotten.
Anyway, I think I've made that point.
I'll skip over the other points and move
to the last point I made,
which is that the Arms Advisory Group,
in the legislat- or, or in the draft legislation, it comprises
a balance
of people from both the firearms owning
and non-firearm owning
community,
including people who are concerned from a health perspective about the
mitigation of harms from firearms.
So
contrary to some of the earlier speakers who seem to think that
there is some God-given right
to bear arms,
and also that,
they have the expertise, that's to say firearms owners, to
be on this,
Arms Advisory Group.
Um,
I grant them that they have that expertise, but they also
have a particular interest, which is
not necessarily the public interest.
So we need to make sure... And part of the problem is that the
minister gets to appoint that group.
Um,
so I certainly hope the select committee will be keeping a watching
brief on the minister as to how she
uses that authority or power,
and call her to account if she's not,
achieving the balance that's spoken of.
Um,
anyway, I'll stop there if there's any questions.
Right. Well, first one I've got from is Vanusi Walters.
Um, thank you very much for your submission, Graham.
Um, on your point three in your submission, you talk about reducing the
licensing period and having probationary licenses,
for first time applicants. Is that on the basis of another
jurisdiction, or what's the basis of your proposal there?
Straight out common sense, the idea of a probationary
period. We do it with,
motor vehicle holders. They begin as
probationers,
and
if they prove to be, safe and effective
drivers, they then move on to the
longer-term license.
Um,
so that seems to me to be a very common sense approach.
If you have someone who's,
fr- at least from an official point of view, never had anything to do with
firearms, suddenly apply. That is actually quite a big
step.
Um, and
I, I accept that it shouldn't be, be, be, you know, there shouldn't be too
many bureaucratic hurdles, et cetera.
But the, nevertheless, there should be, you know, the vetting
process, et cetera,
to make sure that they are, in the minister's words, fit and proper.
Um,
so I, I think that two-step process,
rather than have an incredibly short,
re-licensing period,
that it be just that first
license,
be a temporary or probationary.
Okay. All right. Hey, thank you very much for your submission this morning.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're gonna go to Mr. Craig O'Brien, who's on Zoom as
well.
Craig, are you with us this morning?
Good day.
Hey, Craig. Are you there?
Yes, I am. It's just unmuting.
Oh, yeah. That's cool. Hey, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay. Thank you very much for the opportunity to t-
talk to you this morning.
Um, my background is IT network engineer for the government,
and part of my role is looking after classified computer
networks. Um, there's
the,
protection of, um...
Oh, start my video.
That's all right. Yeah, cool. How you going?
Got a bit mumbled there. Um,
as part of my job is protecting information,
and I feel that the, registry should be protected as
well. That, the sort of information that the,
police and others,
undertake has to be,
u- under restricted capability. That was my first point.
The second point is the,
the vetting that we should be able to use a club m- being a member of a club as a
vetter.
These people know you as a member. They know how you
behave-Um, the third point
I'd like to make is in terms of taking firearms
in and out of the country. I've, I've done that on numerous
occasions, and
what I think we should now do is, give people
the, a, like a visa. So for the
license
lifetime, for the,
the licensed, duration and passport duration, you
could,
go onto my firearms and,
register your firearm. I'm taking it out of the country to this
event and bringing it back to New Zealand and on this date,
and then you don't have to do that. And
because it's, the firearm's already registered, you can, add
it. You can...
Sorry, am I...
Sorry, am I not making any sense here?
No, you are. You are. Yep.
Okay.
Right, I'll slow down. Yeah, so the,
what I, I suggest is some sort of, travel visa for
firearms.
Yeah.
Similar to what I used to do, have, to do to the, go to the
US for planning conferences.
The, the visa was valid for the duration of the passport
and if you,
register on my re- register and all your firearms are registered
and you want to take that one out of the country, you click on it, you
specify the flights, where you're taking it and when you're bringing it
home. Um, you don't have to pay any money.
And similar for things like visitors.
If visitors come to New Zealand hunting and things
like that, they should be able to just go onto the,
my firearms licensing, you're registered.
Once, o- when you're coming back again, you just click on, I'm take, bringing this
firearm into New Zealand again, click.
Um,
I remember coming, coming into Wellington with my firearm
from going to Australia.
The,
policeman just said, "Hand over your firearms license." I forgot it.
I'd left it at home. He took my passport, entered the passport
information, saw my firearm, saw my license, ticked it
off. "Yeah, okay, you're entered." We should be able to use s- something similar
without having to do vast bureaucracy of filling in forms and...
All right. Hey, um-
That's my submission. Thank you.
Very good submission, particularly around the visa.
Can I just go back to your very first point?
You implied with your job, you had knowledge
of security around, data systems.
Maybe I inferred that.
Yes.
Just that we've had a lot of comments around security
of the register. I'm just wondering if you could give us comment in
your professional capacity around protection of that,
whether, obviously there are data breaches, but whether you've got any
insights that would be helpful for, to the committee.
Yes. Well, see, my, I used to work for the defense force,
looking after military networks and some of them
are at a highly classified level.
So the protection of information was,
on a need-to-know basis. So if you, you, you
want, had to know the information but your colleague didn't, they weren't
shown.
Um,
the information is protected. You have to sign for it and
things like overseas sites where I had to work, you had
to,
site,
depending on the type of network, it was encrypted.
Um, information is air-gapped, which means that, it's not
accessible through the internet.
But a- are you concerned about the, register?
Many people have got a concern that the register, you know, details can
be leaked to, the criminals and therefore that people are
exposed with their own property because they've been, they'll be
targeted because they've got weapons or rifles.
What's your view on that?
Yeah.
I, I, for me, for, for net, for the network itself, it has to
be,
the information has to be protected.
So for example, somebody inside that may want to leak that
information to a, a gang member or somebody
for money,
they cannot access the complete information.
They might say, "Oh, Mr. O'Brien has a Anchos firearm."
Um, but they don't, they can't access the serial number or-
Right
... details of the weapon.
Um,
so-
Okay. All right. So there, there's security measures you can put in place.
Yeah.
But it all comes back to the design of the system.
Right.
All right. Thank you, Mr. O'Brien.
We're a little bit over time, but thank you for your submission this morning.
Thank you.
Cool.
Right. Now, members, we're going to Mr.
Warwick Gibbs. Hopefully... Oh, here you are. Great.
Here we go.
Cool. You know the drill. You've been here since this day.
Yes. Yes.
Um, you no doubt will have, seen my submission, but
I would like to take the time today just to, launch into
an area of concern with me, which is mental
health and suicide.
Um,
I did 28 years in law enforcement in New Zealand, and I've seen firsthand,
how people take their lives, including a firearm.
Um, suicide by firearm is the main cause of death, with a firearm in
New Zealand, and this is a tragedy, but it is not a
risk-Or a direct threat of firearms ownership to the
public.
It is obviously to the firearm owner.
Depression is a common ailment, and medical sources stating that,
a 90% chance of someone with a deep depression committing suicide
if they have not received treatment.
I'm not medically trained, but I would say that somebody who's prepared to jump off
a bridge or take their life with a firearm is, has spiraled down
into a deep depressive state.
It is the person who does not or can't seek treatment who is at risk,
and there should be no impediment expressed or implied, for people
to seek treatment.
You've removed patient-doctor confidentiality, and that was with
the changes made earlier, and you've now placed an
obligation to self-report under Section
73 with regard to Section 69 of this Act.
This system collapses if a person does not self-report,
doesn't or can't seek treatment,
or no one around them reports them,
and this could occur in a rural situation or in the case of an introvert who
keeps things to themselves.
In my 40s, I developed depression.
I had suicidal thoughts, and I sought help.
I was able to talk freely with my GP and tried various
medications. I had counseling sessions with a psychologist and a
psychiatrist,
all this before the formation of a firearm safety authority.
At no stage was there any talk of removal of a firearm, and I
discussed at length with the psychologist the importance of getting out and doing
what I enjoy doing, hunting and shooting,
and how heading into the hills and spending time getting back to nature is a
powerful treatment for mental health issues.
At no stage did I threaten anyone, and I'm still here.
My concern is being too quick to remove a person's license could remove one of the
most powerful tools available at getting both mentally and physically
healthy again,
and I'm concerned that there are others, could be many others out there who
should seek help, and I sympathize them with being reluctant to do
so.
My recommendation is if the state requires us to self-report
and potentially jeopardize our fit and proper status, then the state needs to
show us compassion and a care-- and a duty of care.
The whole system falls apart if we're not working in partnership.
Uh, I propose a new section to this bill
titled Duty of Care by the Chief Executive of Arms
Regulator under this Act. Section one, the chief
executive must ensure in all dealings with the applicant or license holder
that the applicant or license holder is treated fairly, with
respect and honesty, without fear, favor, malice,
or ill will.
And my second,
second subsection, in, in dealing with the license holder when considering
a change in their fit and proper status with regard to Section sixty-nine
one I and Section seventy-three one F, the chief
executive will ensure at all times privacy, empathy, and a
graduated response that will not automatically result in the loss of
license. Uh, I have a couple of other, points there.
I have copies of my submission if anyone would like to, consider,
my recommendation, further to hand to the committee,
and I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. Um, first question, Mr. Todd Citizen.
Thank you. We'd very much like those, your submi-
Mm-hmm
... your extra materials, so please just hand that to the clerk, 'cause you've
obviously gotten quite a bit of thought about this.
And, and thank you for sharing your own,
experience. J- just so I'm clear, obviously this bill
does try to, make some changes around,
how kind of health and firearms are,
are, are treated because I think, yeah, again, there's a recognition that it's a
pretty, blunt tool just to
remove someone's firearm license when they've s- sought help.
Um,
so a- are you basically saying we should go further, in protecting,
firearms owners' rights when they basically self-report
issues?
Yes. Well, the, the,
the, the bill and, and the act as it stands forward,
doesn't really give us anything, any kind of protection,
apart from saying things like we must be given a license when
we've passed the fit and proper pur- person purpose.
But you, you... How, how can we, how
can we expect a person who has
on their own spiraled down into a dark place looking at the gun
cabinet, how can we
seriously expect them to pick up the phone and contact,
a regulatory authority?
Yeah.
Um, you know, and, and, and the more,
the more education, but in actual fact, having it in legislation, "Hey,
come forward. This will not result...
This is, this is the process or it's not going to result in you losing your license
immediately." And we go through enough hoops, hoops to get them.
Yeah.
And,
and yeah, our firearms and our recreation with them and that,
means a lot to us. So yeah.
Thank you.
Hey, thank you for your submission this morning and being so,
honest and transparent around that. It's very helpful for the committee.
Cool. Thank you.
Thank you. Cool.
Uh, right. We are go- now going to go to
Mr. Alexander Gillespie, who's by Zoom.
Mr. Gillespie, we've got five minutes with you.
Good morning, select committee. Thank you for taking the time to talk to me.
Um, I amA member of the Ministerial Arms Advisory
Group, but I do not speak on their behalf, and I'm a recipient of the Boren
Foundation, which took me to nine countries to look at arms practice around the
world, and I do not speak on their behalf either.
I have four basic points which I would like the committee to consider.
The first one is the necessity to focus on self-harm.
This is the elephant in the room. We are losing considerably more
Kiwis to this than we are to homicide.
The way that best practice works overseas ...
Oh, and I should add that the New Zealand trend is different to overseas with
self-harm. We're not as bad as America, but we are worse than Australia and Britain
in terms of a percentage method.
The way to improve it, one, make the problem
visible in the preamble.
Two, promote science so that we can get a better understanding of
where the difficulty lies. Three, divide the problem between the
licensed firearms owners and the unlicensed firearms owners.
The solution for the licensed is in community.
The solution for the unlicensed is in better access to safe storage
facilities, whereby we have got higher standards and
possibly the free distribution of locks.
Second problem, extremism. New Zealand is not
different to the threats from this internationally.
It is foreseeable that there will be another terror attack in New Zealand that will
use firearms.
The best practice overseas, and we're, we're doing well in this, but we can do
better. First thing, we need to treat semi-automatic
handguns the way we treat semi-automatic long guns.
We need the same prohibition with regards to magazine capacity.
Your second defense, and we saw the threatening with Bondi,
is that even if you're not dealing with the platform of firearms, you've got a
risk of higher capacity weapons. The
solution here is communities. We need to have
compulsory membership for all gun ownership.
It's not just pistol clubs, it should also be for shooting and hunting as well, and
as well as collectors.
You will never take the risk to zero with terrorism, but we can
reduce it to where it is now.
Your third problem is with organized crime.
Here, the international trend is very negative, and it is
likely that the criminal fraternity will increase their firepower to a greater
degree than what they have in the past.
The trend overseas is going towards almost military capacity, not just
civilian capacity. The way that New Zealand can improve this,
our risk is our gray market, where we have between 100 and
200,000 firearms currently unlicensed.
These are not those who are with licensed people, these are between the license
holder and the criminal.
The necessity to soak up the gray market will require
change in the way that we allow people to hand in firearms without fear of
prosecution,
market-based compensation for those which are prohibited, and moving
to other incentives for people to hand in non-prohibited firearms,
such as a voucher system.
Your second tool is we need to do better on ammunition sales,
because as much as you've got illegal firearms, you've got illegal ammunition,
and here there should be no gap between the private seller and
the commercial seller. And best practice overseas is that someone who
sells ammunition can only sell that ammunition of the type to the firearm
that the person possesses.
Your fourth and final problem, but I'll let my assistant, Claire Annabel, speak to
this because she's the foremost expert, is technologies.
The trend overseas is that they are advancing quicker than they
are in New Zealand, and we aren't seeing as many 3D firearms as
they are overseas, and I think that's because of the gray market problem we've got
in New Zealand that's already saturated.
But this will expand rapidly by 2028.
What the law needs to be here is, one, flexible, because
change is gonna happen so quickly that the minister and the agencies that
regulate need to be able to respond with greater speed than they have in the past.
Two, it is good to regulate new technologies rather
than just have prohibitions, but, three, the regulation
must be on the upper side of safe, not on the lower side.
This means, yes, people should be able to explore new
technologies if they have a manufacturer's license.
It should not be set at the point where if you've got a
license to possess, possess a firearm, you should be able to explore this
technology. Manufacture, yes, but with a manufacturer's
license.
That's it.
Right. Very good. Um, question from Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Thank you for your submission. Um, you mentioned this idea of
all licensed firearms owners, are, you know, being members of a
club and a, or a range-
Yeah
... for firearms. Yep. Uh, do you think that some of the rules currently
around, firearms clubs
are kind of impacting their ability to continue operating?
Or, you know, do you see any issues in the, in the regulatory barriers that they
face at the moment?
The, the importance of club membership is that the best
defense for a community in terms of the next risk of a terror
attack is in intelligence, and compulsory club membership
means that we have an oversight of everyone who has a firearm.
It needs to be coupled with what best practice is in countries like Canada, where
there is an obligation to report concerning behavior.
This also, compulsory membership, has the advantage of
incentivizing people to join clubs, and that can be good
for the clubs in themselves. It's not about trying to say no, it's about trying to
have extra additions which give the authorities the ability for
oversight.
Can I just ... On the comment you just made there, do you think
there's no mandatory requirement to report someone if you've got concerns
about them at the moment. Do you, do you think that we should go that far in New
Zealand?
Yes, I do. And this is because, like,
sometimes-Certain people spot concerning
behavior, and it's about getting that spotting to the correct
authorities. And so, like, with regard to the Christchurch terror
attack, we know that there was concerning behavior there, but it, it was not
reported adequately. But if you made it mandatory to report concerning
behavior, the authorities have a better chance of spotting that
potentially extreme risk, no matter how remote it is.
But we already have compulsory club membership for pistols.
My argument is overseas that they have also compulsory club membership
for hunting, for sport shooting, for collectors.
And the more that these communities can self-regulate and watch each other, the
greater chance you've got of something being spotted.
It's not foolproof, but it's one more step.
All right. And last thing, a bit well over time, but drones and
electromagnetic,
guns, if you wanna use that word, are, are not addressed at all.
Um, I think that's sort of going back to Mr.
Simpson's comment, but,
how...
What do you think we should do to give us flexibility?
You better do that through regulation, aren't you, rather than primary
legislations?
Yes. You, you need to be, able to regulate quickly
and faster than we currently do right now.
You need to have a balance of precaution which errs towards
restriction rather than pro... rather than allowance until something
happens.
Okay.
The only trend we've got overseas is that this is changing very
quickly in terms of the new technologies.
And so while we might be focused on 3D today, it will be something else
tomorrow.
Yeah.
And it's not... The, the minister is correct to try to
work with the change in technology but make the standard higher.
And so if you manufacture firearms of any capacity, then
make sure that they've got a manufacturer's license, not just a license to possess.
Okay. All right. He- thank you, Mr. Gillespie. That's very helpful.
Very helpful this morning.
Right. Now we're gonna move on to, Clementine Annabel,
who's also by Zoom.
Uh, good morning. Tēnā koutou katoa.
Good morning. Yeah. We've got five minutes.
Great. Well, I'm concerned that this bill doesn't go far enough to prevent firearm
harm, which as you would know already, it can be absolutely
devastating. And I'm gonna highlight a few changes that could make New Zealand
safer.
So firstly, the, the medical side of our licensing currently
relies too much on hope, and we are hoping for honest
self-disclosure, and we are hoping for accurate information from referees.
And we're also hoping that when the health professional's notified
after the license is issued, that they act on any concerns
faster than the new license holder could get a gun.
And so we're operating on a kind of presumption of medical fitness, and this is
something other countries are moving away from in favor of mandatory medical
assessments. So
for example, we've seen mandatory medical assessments introduced in Western
Australia's new law. The EU introduced it in twenty
twenty-one, and across Asia in the four jurisdictions I've recently
visited to look at this in Japan, South Korea, India, and Singapore,
also mandatory medical assessment's a baseline.
Looking to Britain, in twenty twenty-one, and you may be aware, there was an awful
massacre in Plymouth where a license holder murdered five people, including an
infant. And in that case, there was relevant information that was effectively
siloed from the-- those making the decision about the license.
And so Britain made mandatory medical assessments,
occur for all licenses from then to make
sure that this kind of thing doesn't happen again.
Look, we already have a blueprint for this kind of mandatory medical check.
Under New Zealand law, if you drive a heavy vehicle, under Land
Transport Rule section nineteen, you need to get a medical check.
And if you were to move s- a similarly,
consistent and robust check here in the Arms Bill, you could make New Zealand
safer.
I want to next speak about tech. So as Professor Gillespie has said,
3D printing of weapons is of great concern. It's only getting cheaper.
It's getting easier and more accessible.
There's concerning links to extremism, and particularly right-wing, but there's
also a really worrying trend around youth printing these.
And as of August twenty twenty-five, there were eighty cases, around the
world involving youth as young as thirteen, printing firearms and,
intending to commit atrocities. So it's really good that this bill
starts to address 3D printing in section two six seven.
But to make it gold standard, you need to require specific
authorization for manufacturing, as Professor Gillespie said, and also introduce an
offense for unauthorized d- distribution of files.
That's what Canada's done, and that's what the new EU directive that,
is being put forward at the moment is going to do.
And also consider tightening ammunition supply rules.
To move to drones now, that does need a good hard look.
So drones and firearms overseas increasingly are being seen together, and that's
both in passive offensive, so that's drones being used to transport or smuggle
firearms, or drones being used, for surveillance in conjunction
with attacks or plans to attack. And then we're starting to see
active offensive, where drones are being weaponized with a firearm.
So it's really great that this bill under Section five expands that definition of
possession to remote.
But we've also got New Zealand, people in New Zealand inquiring with the Civil
Aviation Authority already asking can they legally use their,
gun on a drone to-- for pest control and so on.
And look, the answer is currently quite fuzzy, so this
is an area where you could look to be more explicit and do something
like what New South Wales has done, where they've made it really explicit in their
Arms Act that you can't put a firearm on a drone unless you have
specific authorization to do so.
Uh, the third technology I'd like to speak to is those electromagnetic weapons.
And when I was in Japan, law enforcement, uh-emphasised to me that
they have pre-emptively moved on these as they see them getting,
more and more powerful.
But here in New Zealand, this kind of device, it
risks sitting outside of our current law because it's not using an explosive
charge and, and it's not an air gun either.
So I urge you to consider how the b- bill deals with these and whether
the, maybe the firearm definition should relate to capacity for
harm regardless of the energy source, because today it's el- electromagnetic
weapons, but we don't know what's coming tomorrow.
I've also mentioned three other measures other countries have for reducing harm in
my submission, and those are restricting untargeted advertising,
mandating high-vis clothing for hunters, and a presumption of a numeric
limit on firearms. So
our arms law is such a crucial lever for reducing harm, and by tightening it
now, you make New Zealand safer before another tragedy unfolds.
Hey, thank you, Ms. Annabel. I've got a question from Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, a couple of quick ones from me. Thank you for your submission.
Uh, interesting idea around the kind of, energy source and making sure we're
not dealing-- Um, so the other issue we've had is,
the soft... Well, like, so basically air rifle-
Yes
... people and different velocity, you know, I don't know if you've seen some of
the submissions.
Yes.
But that could also deal with that problem.
So we could actually specify a,
a velocity
type restriction, do you think? And then so make sure that they're not
captured, but the kinds of things you're talking about are.
What you wanna make sure that you capture is any kind of weapon that is going
to be able to cause, injurious or lethal harm.
Yeah. Cool. And then just one last thing, just with the medical assessments.
Mm-hmm.
Just to be clear.
Yes.
I, I, I mean, I love the term medical assessments, but what you're actually asking
for is kind of a psychological assessment. Is that not right?
Uh, actually, there's a number of parts to it.
So think about things like, eyesight and cognitive skills.
So you're looking at physical, you're also, physical,
eyesight, and so on, cognitive, and also there is a psychological
aspect as well, yes, those three aspects.
All right.
Thank you. And I've got a very quick question from Ms., Vanusi
Walters.
Uh, thank you for your submission.
Just on emerging technologies, we've had a conversation about whether
those changes or that capacity to change the law should be in primary legislation
or in regulation, and the need for speed.
It looks to me like the countries you've referenced have all put that in primary
legislation. Do you know if they have any sort of
mechanisms to allow them to update those provisions?-
Mm-hmm.
So in Australia and Japan?
Uh, what I do know, with Japan,
what I know is that they're trying to be very careful to
ensure that it's not just 3D per se, but that other,
technologies also for printing, such as electronic milling machines,
are included as well. So they're definitely looking to try and
capture widely as much as possible.
Uh, they're also seeking to include it in that primary legislation because it's so
important.
All right. Hey, very good. Hey, thank you for the submission. Um, very helpful.
We're just getting slightly out of time now, but that's fine.
Now we're gonna go to Mr. Tim Clark
in person.
Good morning, Mr. Clark.
Good morning.
Uh, good morning, committee. Thank you for hearing me. My name is Tim Clark.
I'm a resident of Stokes Valley. I'm a competitive sportsman in
rifle and pistol disciplines, and a provider for my wife and daughter.
I'm here to support the primary administrative reforms in this bill.
Specifically, I support the transition to an independent Crown agency to
separate the judge and jury roles
currently held by the police. I also strongly support objective fit and
proper criteria. Law-abiding citizens need clear legislated
rules rather than being subject to the gut feelings or personal
biases of individual officers.
However, while I support these structural fixes, I must pivot to where the bill
fails to protect the rights and safety of responsible owners.
I am here to voice my strong opposition to the firearms registry and the bill's
failure to explicitly recognize the legitimate use of firearms.
The registry is a high-risk directory that endangers my family by
making my home a target for violent burglaries.
On February 14th of this year, I experienced a privacy breach that
demonstrates how this information could easily fall into the wrong
hands. I called a dealer to arrange an ammunition pickup
specifying two authorized persons who could collect it.
Using only first and last names, the dealer's registry access
automatically pulled the private home addresses and license numbers for
myself and the two who were authorized to collect it.
The sensitive data was printed on a piece, on a, on a paper receipt
that was sticky taped to the boxes of ammunition.
Being taped loosely to a box being transported, it could easily be lost.
Anyone who finds that receipt now has a target list with the locations of
three separate firearms collections.
Proponents claim the registry is for traceability, but the state already has a
record of every serial number entering the country via import permits.
The registry tracks the two hundred and forty thousand of us who follow the law,
and it creates a massive security vulnerability for all our families with zero
public safety benefit.
I strongly support the position held by COLFO and NZDA
that the bill must be amended to explicitly include a recognition of legitimate
use in its purpose and principles.
Lawful firearms use is a legitimate and essential part of New Zealand
society.
For my family, this is a matter of food sovereignty.
I saw rec- I saw as recently as February 15th,
my local supermarkets closed down because of a power outage.
We saw supermarket shelves run empty during COVID, and God knows
how the current fuel prices will affect our supply chain.
Harvesting wild venison is a direct exercise of my right to provide for
my family, so we are not solely dependent on vulnerable industrial
systems.Without an explicit statement of legitimacy in the
bill, the regulator will continue to treat us as an inherent risk to be
sanitized out of culture rather than as partners in local
resilience.
We must acknowledge the consequences of the twenty nineteen ban on semi-automatic
rifles. These were the most effective tools for managing mobile
mobs of pests.
Since they were removed, deer populations have surged by thirty to fifty percent in
some regions, damaging our most sacred taonga, our
forests.
We disarmed the volunteer hunters who did this work for free, and now the
taxpayer is footing a thirty million dollar bill for DOC to try to fix the mess.
This is an environmental and economic disaster, and the current legislative
path refuses to address it. Finally, I ask
that you restore the balance of power.
Any permanent seizure of a citizen's property must be ordered by a court,
not an administrator. My firearms are my family's largest
financial a- asset after our home, and they deserve the same judicial
protection as any other property.
I'd like us to move for, to move forward towards a system based
on objective facts and respect for the law-abiding provider.
Thank you for hearing me.
All right. Very good. Um, can I just ask, ask on that very last point?
So you're saying,
if, if
the agency want to come and take your firearms for,
for certain reasons, the- there's got to be a high legal
threshold.
I'd like it to be court-ordered, like anything else.
Any other situation where property is taken, it's taken by a
court order. I don't want some
activist police officer to decide that my, my most
valuable possession should be confiscated.
And a- what do you think the threshold is at the moment for a police
officer, you know, activist police of- officer to do it?
Do, do you th-
From your understanding of the bill-
Mm-hmm
... what do you think that... B- because they've got to act with the
right intent. They've got to do all that.
So
why do you think that there's not sufficient sort of
safeguards there?
Uh, because there's a whole, there's, there's some
piece of writing in the legislation that says, could
be deemed not a fit and proper person for other reasons.
Those other reasons are open to interpretation, I believe.
Okay.
Um-
So that's a, that's the concern.
That's a concern, yeah.
Yeah.
Um, I also know several police officers who have said that they can just say, "I
had a feeling about that guy", and they're authorized to
come and take firearms.
So, you know, another option is a warrant.
If you or someone wants to, police want to come to our house-
Requires a judge
... they get a, they can get a warrant
Or a judge, yeah.
They can get that relatively quickly.
Yep.
Um-
I'm happy with that.
You'd be... But I think what you're probably getting at is for other reasons, that,
that part of the legislation-
The, the fit and proper criteria, yeah.
Yeah. Okay, cool. Um-
That, that, that can be open to weaponization in all kinds of way.
I've got a friend of mine who's currently facing, potentially seven years in
prison and, struggling to fight for custody of his child
because his now bitter ex-partner claims he beat her.
Yeah.
There is no evidence other than she claims it.
And it's very easy for all of a sudden he has a criminal record, and he's obviously
no longer a fit and proper person.
Okay. All right. Hey, thank you for your submission.
Thank you for making that time.
Detailed.
Come to Stokes Valley.
Thanks for hearing us.
Go Stokes Valley.
Mm.
Right. Um, now, Mr Craig Innes is not
available, but David Wood hopefully is
available on Zoom.
How we going there?
Mr Wood, are you with us?
Good morning, Mr Wood. We've got five minutes with you.
We can't... You might have to turn your mu- mute off.
Yes. Good morning committee. Hope you can hear me okay.
Yeah, we can. Thank you.
Jolly good. Thank you. I do have a, a hearing, problem.
Something to do with shooting, I believe.
Committee, I'm appearing here simply to emphasize the one and only point in my
very short submission. You'll notice it's only three pages,
and that is halfway down the first page.
I'm alleging that it is we're here wasting all our time because of the
continuing incompetence of police forces in the UK,
Australia and the USA.
My written submission only touches on a few of these, and you're probably
familiar with most of them. But I have many more in my records
that I've collected over forty years of travel throughout the world.
And my legal training over forty years has always led me back to go back
to the first principles.
And we're here because a lot of people have died because
people in very responsible positions have failed their
tasks.
My submission simply zeroes in on that simple conclusion.
We can tinker with the act as much as we like,
and I've been making submissions through the select committees more times than I
can remember. It does go back to nineteen eighty-twos and
three.
But we can tinker as much as we like, but if those at the sharp end don't do their
job, we will continue to see tragedies.
I believe your task as this committee
is to make a very strong recommendation to Parliament
that we stick to the principle of vetting people properly,
and when they fail, those people have failed.
They should be reprimanded and moved out of those
positions.That they were tasked to enforce, for
example, terror.
I've listened to, there's a Professor Alexander Gillespie just a
moment ago,
and
Professor Gillespie's traveled the world and,
investigated and researched
all over the world. But note
that,
the professor
makes the usual recommendations,
changing things that will only affect lawful people,
and the danger is very rarely from lawful people.
I, I treasure this card. This is the one, the firearm card
that I'm given by the police,
and of course, it makes me, in their eyes, a fit and proper
person.
But unfortunately, too many people get this card,
and of course, we have the Christchurch incident,
which is the epitome
of incompetence.
I do accept one point that, Professor Gillespie makes, and that
is club membership is very helpful, and we w- and
some time ago, the law actually acknowledged that,
that the clubs were
given the responsibility to report people to the police
if they thought somebody was failing in their mental or physical
ability to have firearms.
But even that hasn't worked in my case.
Twice in my career,
serious firearms incidents occurred, and in both
c-cases, the f- the police failed to investigate.
So, committee, that is my simple recommendation.
Uh, I decided to keep it simple.
There are people that I've,
said that I, recommend,
es-
especially,
the following,
speaker that you'll hear, Grant Fetcher, with his very detailed
and academic, discussion on the law.
But I'd simply like w- keeping my submission-
Okay
... made as simple as I've made it. Thank you.
Hey, thank you, Mr. Wood. Um, I think we're, we don't have any
questions first, but we understand what you've said, and it's very important.
Thank you very much this morning.
Uh-
Thank you.
Now we're gonna go to Mr. Ross Mason.
Uh,
Ross, good morning.
Morning.
Um, just a couple of comments of I, I s- I spent the
day a few weeks ago listening.
I'm happy with the changes to the clubs and ranges aspe-aspect of the bill.
I was, been involved the last thirty years in,
inspecting rifle ranges for NRA and,
votes in New Zealand.
Um,
whistleblowers protection, they, that's come up today as well.
Uh,
whist-whistleblowers protection specifically for clubs who
dob in people, quote, "people of interest,"
just exactly like that person who's just spoken.
And the gray market of ammunition, gray market of ammunition and rifles
ensure a forever amnesty.
No questions. That'll get, that'll enable people to
deposit firearms.
A few notes from my, submission.
I wish to emphasize the fit and proper aspect of obtaining and
keeping a firearms license. It is most important and most
useful criteria with which to have the privilege of having a firearms license.
There are many aspects of society that require fit and proper.
Uh, two of them I've mentioned. Well, one of them I've mentioned, is that is you
don't need to be fit and proper to get a driver's license, and that's the most
dangerous place in New Zealand.
Uh,
I also note that you don't have to be fit and proper to be a MP.
Uh, yeah. Touché.
The Arms, '83 Arms Act has seventy-eight clauses.
This bill has four hundred and ten.
This is bureaucratic bloat in simple terms.
The '83 act has seven descriptors of firearms.
This arms bill has fifteen. Where did they come from?
And it's also confusing.
Uh, orders and counsel pertaining to especially dangerous ai-air guns has
meant young adults need a firearms license for one of the least dangerous air
rifles used in Olympic sports. It staggered me why these were included,
yet paintball had similar levels.
Please consider in-international energy levels and standards.
These have been mentioned before.
I recommend classifying firearms by muzzle energy.
It was brought up earlier today. Um,
not just caliber or means of propulsion.
That'll cover the electronic, firearms that person was talking about
in, in Japan.
Um, no firearms license required for, should
be no- not required for muzzle energy of less than sixteen joules.
That covers practically every air rifle and paintball and,
. For all other firearms, regulate them by mu- muzzle energy.
Anything under three hundred joules is a low-power firearm.
Anything over three hundred joules is a high-power firearm.
That might take a lot of confusion out of the,
out of the, bill.
Accessories made privately of parts that do not make the firearm go
bang should be free to sell privately.
There's a clause in there that won't allow me to ma-- If I make an accessory for
my, my target, I can't sell that accessory unless I go through a dealer, which
is,
quite frankly, s-silly.Tried, trying to capture
threeD by outlawing documents, et cetera, of those who've got
documents who I, I'd hate to think what the intent of making them
is. I'm afraid that
there's lots of people with, lathes and milling machines in their backyard
for, it's, which is equivalent to 3D printers.
Give it up.
Extend visitor's license to more than 12 months.
I suggest 15 to 18. It means less administration for both
parties, and as far as w- I, I am deeply involved with the, the annual
sh- shooting at, Trentham, and 12 months means you have
to apply for a visitor, visitor's license every year.
If you stretched it out to even 15 months, it's enough to cover two, two
years and, and, half the time.
Right.
Disabled shooting and their assistants.
These people are being discriminated against.
They're being forced to have their assistants get a firearms license.
I am in contact with a shooter in Christchurch whose local
firearms license decided that he can't have a firearms license unless his pa- his
wife gets a firearm license 'cause she does the carrying of it and getting it out
of the safe for him 'cause he can't handle that.
He is doing it under immediate supervision.
Doing it orally as opposed to doing it physically,
with when you go hunting, et cetera.
Thank you very much.
Right. Very helpful. Can I just, just be clear, your very first
comment, you were saying the legislation and regulation relating
to, the clubs,
you're, you're comfortable with?
Yeah. Clubs and the, the changes-
Yeah, the changes
... and, and the tu- and, yeah.
Because we're, we're worried that the clubs are gonna disappear because of
overregulation and over compliance costs.
Do you think that that won't happen under the current arrangements?
I, I don't think so. We, I mean, we've, we, we've, we've been through the, the,
the, the new process, if you like-
Right
... and it's not too horrendous.
Right.
I mean, the problem was becoming another incorporated society registering on the
new, new system, and that was a p**n i* t*e a*s.
Yeah.
Okay, cool. Um-
But the, the, the selling of or, or obtaining the ammunition and selling it to
club, within the clubs and things like that and, it's-
Is that all right?
You be-- You're incorporated, that's great.
Okay. As long as you're incorporated you can do that very easily.
Yep.
Right. Right. One question from Mr. Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Um, I was interested in your comment in your
submission around the, international visitor
moving from 12 to 18 months, something we've raised previously, and then you make
the comment about
reference should be given to international shooting organizations,
and their knowledge of, of those participants.
Yes.
Uh, did you have any more detail behind what you thought should occur
there? Is that, is that a general comment, or is there a change that you think
should happen?
I'll give you an example for Australia.
I'm off to, Brisbane in October.
Uh, when we apply to, to take our firearms into Australia, we deal
through the organization that's doing the, the event.
We don't all have to go to the Queensland whatever the-
Yeah
... the, the thing is. So, we had the world champs here,
and 400 shooters turned up to, to Australia from, the
world. Um, and we tried to,
explain to the police, "Look, we know who's coming.
The- these are all-- they're all legit.
You know, they, you don't have to deal with them,
all, all, you know, individually," effectively.
Right.
And we know about them. We know them. They're regular visitors.
It'll save the vetting system and checking system.
You know, if they've, they've been here before, we can say that they're still a
current member of Au- Australia, for instance.
That's where most of them come from these days.
All right. Hey, thank you.
Thank you.
Um, thank you for a very helpful submission.
Good. I'd like to really check the disabled shooting issue as well.
Yeah, that's... Thank you for raising that. So.
Okay, cool. Now, we're going to go to, Mr.
Jim Smith,
via Zoom.
Yeah, are you there, Mr. Smith?
Yes, I'm here.
Hello. We've got five minutes with you. Rip into it.
Okay.
Um, so basically, firstly I was quite pleased to
see, the makeup of the select committee and how many of the members today
actually come from the, provinces and the rural area.
That's right.
So that was, that was q- quite heartening, so, I'm quite pleased about that.
Um, beyond that,
my role is I often assist, mainly fathers through
the family court with regards to, protection orders and the Family
Violence Act, as well as c- care of children matters.
And, and it would seem that there is a little bit of a tie-up with the
Arms Act and, the Family Violence Act,
particularly Section 22H, subsection B.
My concern with that is the,
the, the courts
already have the ability to hear the evidence
if someone wants to be-- come along and actually have a variation to their final
protection order,
to be a, to enable them to have a firearms license.
However, under Section 22HB,
there is a standard 10-year moratorium on them being able to hold a
firearms license.
So my argument is,
can we just leave that to the courts to make that determination and repeal that
section?
'Cause the, if you've read my submission, you would actually see that it is already
quite a high bar to get over just to get through that variation in the family
court.
Um,
since I've made my written submission, I've actually received some Official
Information Act, information regarding,
people who get final protection orders through operation of
law.In other words, they don't defend them.
And around about 60% of final protection orders are made
simply because, they're initially served with temporary
protection order,
and they do not bother defending them.
And probably the name temporary protection order is, is
a little bit of an issue, but that's to do with the Family Violence Act, and we're
not here today to talk about that.
However, the other figure that came out of that Official
Information Act request was that of those who do defend their,
temporary protection orders,
around about 11%,
only go final. So it does sort of show that there is a little bit
of a disparity there.
So sorry, only 11% of what?
Only around... This, and this is over around 10 years.
Of those who do defend a protection order, a temporary protection order,
the court only have around 11% will actually go final.
Will actually go to the conclusion and are awarded
reinstated or what?
No. The, so the way it works is you get a temporary protection order
up front,
and you've got 90 days to put in a defense.
Right.
If you do not put in a defense, then it automatically goes final.
Yeah.
So about 60% of protection orders are made final through
operation of law simply because that person hasn't defended it-
Right
... for whatever reason.
Yeah.
Of those who do defend them,
only 11% go final.
So is that 11% of 40? So that's,
that's 5% of all fire protection orders.
Is that right?
No. Of those, of those final protection orders,
the,
basically, as I said, only 11% of protection orders go
final
if they've defended.
Right. Okay. Mm.
But only about 40% are defended.
Okay, cool. Thank you.
So, so my argument is
shouldn't we leave this to the court to make the determination if they're a fit and
proper person to hold a firearms license if they have a final protection order,
and is, subsection,
or sorry, s-
Section 22 (8) subsection B actually necessary?
Right. Okay.
Um, and so my argument is maybe we should look at that and repeal it
and leave it to the courts to make that determination.
All right. Are you, just, can I just ask you a question, um-
Yes
... I, I presume you have finished, I h*- hopefully I haven't cut you off.
Yes. Yes. No, I'm, I'm, I'm here more for questions and, uh-
Yeah. So just, there's a number of submissions talking about,
where pe- where, and mostly it's men, but
not always, but men have been, accused of,
of violence against their partner.
The, the partners claim that therefore they've got a fire
protection order against them. But they're not, the fire protection orders are
not then taken, you don't re- get your license
reinstated immediately, that there's a long delay and it can take the
10 years. Is that... I'm just asking you from your legal background, is that the
case you've seen a lot of, of that, instances of that?
I, I do see a lot of instances with that because,
a, a lot of, unlike a lot of other advocates, I actually do have a lot of time for
the family court. Um, and one of the things I do say is that,
everyone loves a good redemption story, and no one loves a good redemption story
more than the family court.
Um, so even if you have made a mistake in the past and you can demonstrate to the
court that, a lot of those issues are now historical,
the family violence may have o- occurred in the context of a relationship
breakdown, which n- normally remedies itself very quickly,
they're still lumbered with this 10-year ban on being able to hold a
firearms license.
Right. Okay.
And this is particularly pertinent for people in rural areas.
So, so my, again, my argument is let's repeal,
22 (8) subsection B and leave it to the court to make that determination.
Okay. I've got Vanu Cee Walton, it says-
Uh, thank you, Jim. I would-
Yeah.
Just a request, for whether you can send that data through that you
referred to.
The OIA.
The OIA information.
Are you able to do that?
Yes, I can do that. Um, it should become publicly available shortly anyway because
I'd o- only received it last week.
But if you can send to the clerk-
Yeah
... where you submitted before, that'd be great.
Okay.
Hey, thank you, thank you for your contribution-
Thanks
... this morning.
Thank you.
All right. Right. Now we've got Foster, Mr.
Foster Price by Zoom. Mr., Price, are you
there?
All right. He's joining us from Southland.
Oh, excellent. Digital w- networks take a while,
don't they? Oh, good broadband down there, don't you worry.
There. Good morning.
I saw your flash up there.
Hopefully you're there.
Is he?
Mr. Price, are you there?
Can't hear you.
He's still on mute.
Yeah, I think you're still on mute if you can hear me.
The wonders of Zoom.
No luck.
He's on mute.
Right. Um, Mr. Price, we, we can't hear or see you unfortunately.
All right. Um,
shall we...
We might have to come back to Mr. Price. Mr.
Price, we just might let you continue exploring how you can
get video and we might move on to Mr.,
De Jong, I
thinkGood morning.
Good morning.
Thank you for being flexible.
I'll just unmute myself.
There's always a thing about being here in person.
Right, you've been here for a while, so you know what's happening.
Yeah, hello everybody. Um, thanks for the opportunity.
I'm Rene de Jong, and the reason I tell you I'm a New Zealand born and trained
doctor, my expertise is in emergency medicine, medical response to mass casualty
events, disasters, man-made or natural, and air medical transport.
It's because I'm here primarily to speak about the effect of the legislation on
patients, but I have concerns about the registry as well.
I mean, it's an absolutely perfect shopping list for evil people to commit violent
home invasions and make lots of money, and that's bad.
And when the inevitable happens, because all databases get hacked, they get leaked,
they get sold, they get unlawfully accessed, that's on us.
There's also, to me, a foolish focus, or an over-focus indeed, on
firearms. A firearm is a tool. Firearms, unlike people and
dogs, it doesn't leap up and attack people of its own volition, right?
It's the criminals who wield them that need to be stopped.
The gun doesn't commit crimes. Why aren't we focusing our efforts on the criminals
and putting them away for longer? Yeah.
But my particular important concern, the reason I showed up is,
we've removed the right to medical confidentiality from law-abiding firearms
owners and by extension their families who are registered with the same doctor,
right? Now, every law-abiding firearms owner knows their doctor can
report anything and everything that the doctor may rightly or
wrongly worry about to the police, and then the police will take
fairly unfettered action as we've already seen in some circumstances.
So the logical, even if unintended, consequence of that means license
holders and family members are much less likely to seek medical help
when they need it. Yeah. To me, that's wrong, it's
harmful, it's counterproductive to health and safety and, I don't speak for my
profession, but I think it's highly unethical for my profession to have gone along
with it, but I'm gonna put myself on mute briefly about that.
If we're doing this because we think firearms owners are uniquely placed, because
we own firearms, to hurt others, not just ourselves, you know,
we need to think about the coldly logical extension of that principle,
if you like, of preventative medicine in a section, right, which is the
anybody with the ability to damage or kill numbers of their fellow
citizens must surely therefore have their behaviors and attitudes and
thoughts and medical concerns reported by their doctors to the police, right?
That's the extension of what we're doing here.
So does that mean we also want all the doctors who look after and interact with,
for example, prime ministers, ministers of the Crown, members of
parliament, sorry, members of the judiciary, senior bureaucrats, and
maybe even candidates for police commissioners?
Uh, do we want those doctors to inform the police whenever those people in those
positions of authority, are thought to be or
subject to mental, physical, drug and intoxicant pressures on
those people's behavior? Because after all, they're in a pretty unique position to
make some fairly wide-ranging and permanent changes to
policies and behaviors and enforcement.
Now, now clearly, I think that's a really disastrous
extension of this principle, but the principle exists.
We've got it as a precedent now.
What if a government, not this government, what if a government that you don't like
later on decides to use these same laws against other groups that they don't like?
What if they use them against you?
Now,
a certain percentage of doctors are also, let's face it, innately hoplophobic.
I'm sure you know what that means, right?
Hoplophobia, diagnosis, irrational fear of firearms.
That's why they call it a phobia, because it's irrational.
So some doctors will, and have occasionally,
made some, shall we say, less than fully evidential, accusations and
reports. A higher percentage of doctors will quite regularly, and I
do it myself, you err on the side of caution when you're looking for things that
may be going wrong with a patient. What happens to all the people who are harmed by
that? In closing, I promise you, the best principles of medical
practice governing medical information over thousands of years are what?
Do no harm. Always a good start. Keep medical information
confidential unless you have to release it, and by
the way, get fully informed consent before you release that patient's private
information to third parties.
Okay. Now that's what I want to ask you.
So we've had one suggestion this morning that we should have mandatory
reporting of people worried about individuals at clubs.
You know, obviously we heard about the-
Yeah
... Christchurch terrorist.
So d--
your... And I get this thing about, medical
confidentiality, right?
Yes.
It's a really important principle.
Do you think there is a threshold when a doctor
might want to think it's in their best interest
to report someone that they think is an immediate,
risk of suicide or, or even worse?
Um-
Absolutely, sir.
Right. So is,
is there a threshold? Because why don't you say like a priest, you should
never, you know, doctors may be like that, right?
Uh, priests never share any of that information.
Or is it-- Do you see any crack in that, that, that
vow,
to release it under extreme situation?
And if so, how would you bring that into account?
No, very definitely there is already a process for that, that I've been working
with for many, many years, where if you have a patient in front of you,
yes, they're a patient, but if they're threatening harm or they've carried out harm
or you think in your judgment, which is always gonna come back to your judgment,
for which you should, in my view, be liable, that this patient could go and do
something immediately, then you have a problem.
And if it's a physically aggressive patient, you call the police, and if
it's a mentally, affected patient, then you look at getting that
patient sectioned under the, appropriate act.
But you said, just then, you said y- you can release that
information, but you need to have the, consent of the
person sitting in front of you.
Uh, you have to, you have to have the consent of the, the person if that's in the
best interest of the patient to release that information.
But what we've got here for firearms license owners is a blanket
instruction to talk to the police.
Yeah, I know. So, what I'm trying to get is your nuance.
Yes, exactly.
So you've got, you've got someone there you think is at real risk of hurting
people.
Yeah.
Uh, and suicide don't-- are not demeaning-Undervaluing suicide, but a suicide-
Mm
... is related to a person.
Yeah.
In terms of community sa-safety, the person we're worried about is the Tarrant-
Yeah
... situation. In that situation,
he-he's in front of you, he's an introver-introvert, you're
worried about him, you think there's gonna think, you know, interestingly you
raised the word liability. Do you think at that point Tarrant wouldn't have
given you his, permission to-
Yeah, the-
Right?
The, the patient's interest is paramount, but we don't ignore the interests of the
community. And to be really blunt, that's what the Hippocratic Oath is
about.
Mm.
Do no harm. That also includes preventing harm that the patient may do
if you think they're a representation-
So under that you've got the ability to report.
Yeah.
Right, sorry, I keep turning-
So just to confirm, you're, you're not arguing for an extent...
an extension of the privilege under the Evidence Act, it's
just you're saying status quo is sufficient.
Yes. What the principle here could be hugely misused.
At the moment it only applies to the licensed firearms owners.
Do we really want that to be enshrined in law?
And if-
Or do we stick with what we've had for decades?
And sorry to push you, but at the moment when you have someone in front of you who
you know has got a firearms license,
you feel that the boundary for reporting to the police is
different than what you would do under the Hippocratic O-oath?
No, because the firearms license holder, the, the, you know, the, the lawful
firearms license holder has been vetted,
which most other people have not been.
So, so come, coming back to the legislation.
Yes.
What do, what do you think we should change in the legislation then?
We should not single out licensed firearms owners group, as a group, that the
doctors uniquely and specifically are mandated to release information
from.
Yeah.
Treat everybody the same please. That's what I'm asking.
Okay. Uh-
Yeah, that's fine.
Yeah. Hey, very helpful.
Thank you.
And, really-
Sorry if I went over time.
Yeah. No. Um, we're a little bit over time, but I hope anyone
listening,
I'm more interested to make sure we get some good commentary rather than
being strict to time where possible, right?
So I apologize for people-
Yeah
... if you're waiting. All right. Hey, thank you very much.
Yeah.
Very, very helpful. Right. Now, we're gonna go back to Mr. Price. Mr.
Price, I hope you're, you're still there.
Oh, is he?
I think he dropped out.
Mr. Price, if you are watching, we do want you...
I saw you on screen just before. I was asking to make sure that you stayed.
But anyway, hopefully you come back.
Right now, we're gonna go on to, Zoran
Rekovic,
by Zoom.
We don't.
Don't have him.
No luck?
Dennis Lally.
Right. We're on to Mr. Dennis Lally.
He
should be here.
Mr. Lally, are you there?
Just, um-
Oh, good morning. Uh, we can't see you, but we can hear you. Oh, there we are.
Cool. Right. We've got five minutes with you.
Thank you.
Right. Um, this time I'm speaking for myself.
So I'm Dennis Lally. I have over fifty years involvement in the
firearms collecting community, including nineteen years service
with New Zealand Police as a firearms vetting officer.
Now, I believe the bill is inconsistent on several issues.
This bill continues the accepted condition that pistols and
restricted weapons, that is, fully automatic weapons, must be
kept secure, with restricted weapons being rendered
inoperable by the removal of a vital part which is kept
secure by the owner. Unfortunately,
the bill contains the bizarre requirement that the
vital part for restricted, previously known as prohibited
firearms,
that is, semi-automatic firearms, must be stored at
another approved person's address.
The storage at a separate address was a last-minute addition to the
prohibited firearms definition when the act was amended in
2019.
Subject Section 2C in the bill demonstrates a complete
lack of trust in the integrity of the additional vetting
and the additional security requirements the endorsed license holder
abides by.
As well, it creates added risk through the
dispersal of vital parts beyond the endorsed license holder's
control.
It raises an untested question of where liability
rests should the remote vital part be lost or
destroyed.
It is contrary to the bill's attested principle of simplifying
compliance.
Furthermore, it is ironic that the storage of vital
parts from restricted weapons, fully automatic firearms,
have been and continue to be considered adequately secured
by the endorsement holder at their own address.
So I recommend the subject, that Subsection 2C be
deleted from Part 4, Section 89.
Now, the bill makes no specific provision for the
continuation of collectors to carry restricted items beyond the curtilage
of their dwellings for the purposes of sale or display, such as
at gun shows, meetings, exhibitions, or auctions.
This was recognized by the Police Arms Manual under the current act,
but I see no suggestion of how that provision is carried forward under the
new arms authority.
This status quo needs to be preserved.
What assurance do collectors have that this will continue?
Many collectors have letters of recognition as bona fide
ammunition collectors.
This has allowed them, under the current act, to possess and acquire
restricted, previously called prohibited,
ammunitionFrom other persons who are also bona fide
ammunition collectors.
The bill prohibits selling or supplying restricted
ammunition,
and yet allows the importation of restricted ammunition.
This is clearly an anomaly, and it makes no recognition
of bona fide collectors.
Large capacity detachable magazines need to be
restricted, but there is no further benefit gained by
marking such magazines with serial numbers and then registering them in the
arms registry.
Indeed, such additional marking and additional
registering diminishes the effectiveness of the arms registry.
As borne out in the bill's definition of a large capacity
pistol magazine,
there is no need to mark or register any large
capacity magazine.
It is sufficient that the purchase, sale, and possession of
such magazines requires an endorsed license.
Finally,
I am concerned by the lack of a description in the definition
of an exempt standard firearm.
I am also concerned at the intent of the definition of
a permanently deactivated firearm.
It appears that these vaguely defined items will
not fall under the definition of a firearm.
Presumably, these items will be allowed to be possessed without a
firearms license.
These items have no precedent in the current act or regulations,
nor mention in the police arms manual.
Do we allow these new categories into law before we define them
or establish what purpose they serve?
Any questions?
Can I, um... So the storage is very relevant.
And, also you didn't touch on the antique,
rifles. You... So as a collector
of antique rifles, and this is one of the weird things that happened with the
previous,
amnesties, a lot of very historical
weapons or arms were destroyed when they really weren't,
wouldn't be used in any criminal activity because of their ca- lack of
capability. Are you suggesting that...
What's the definition of a, of antique firearm at the moment?
An antique firearm at the moment is one that does not take a
metallic cartridge that is center fire or rim
fire. So that would be a, an original muzzle loading,
rifle
or a musket, something like that. Or something that
takes, an obso- very obsolete cartridge, like a pin fire.
So if you're, if you're looking at the New Zealand wars, would a what,
a rifle like that fit into that category or not?
Uh, yes. Ones from the New Zealand wars would, because most
of those were, had paper cartridges and, were percussion caps.
Um-
Okay, so you're, you're suggesting a definition pre-1900.
Is that right?
I have... Well, if we had something like that,
which we don't,
in terms of what, like in other countries, are called
antiques
or, antiques and curios, um-
Is there, is there an international definition of an antique,
rifle that we could pick up that would, you could,
would everyone would understand internationally what that means?
Well, an international one would be probably what is used in America,
where they take firearms that are dated be- before, made
before 1898, and call those antique.
And then firearms that are made in the period of the
first half of the 20th century are pretty much deemed to
be, curios
and are treated, differently, but with less, you
know, they don't require dealers, for instance, to, to be sold and so
on.
Right. Okay. I was cutting off Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks, Dennis. Um, always insightful to listen, to you
and your understanding of this. Uh, earlier today we had,
some feedback around, disabled,
persons' ability to move around their firearms.
Um, and I was interested if in your experience with
antiques, if you've come across examples of antique
dealers, whether they're using, friends or
family to move, their
antique firearms around, and whether or not you've got any concerns like were
shared earlier today around, the licensing for
antique dealers who are maybe disabled or not able to,
move around their collections themselves.
Well, I see no problem if the person is a licensed person.
If they're supervising another person, in their immediate supervision,
that's allowable under all circumstances.
Right. Okay. Hey, thank you, Mr. Lally, for a very insightful
submission. It's been very helpful. Right. We've got Mr. Paul Clark.
Thank you, Chair. Um,
well, I'm gonna say something you might not like, but if the police had vetted
Tarrant properly
and not given him a firearms license, we wouldn't be here today.
Yeah.
That might upset a f- few of you, but we know that the vetting of Tarrant at the
time wasn't done correctly or properly, so this is what we've got,
and the mess keeps going on. We haven't had it resolved.
Now, not a few years ago, we founded COLFO, myself
and John Dye, who'll be speaking later today.
We celebrate thirty years and have spent north of seven figures
making sure that firearm owners aren't screwed, keeping it simple.
Sorry, that's blunt, but that's what's happened, because it's always a
mishmash of power between
a private firearm owning citizen-And the police.
And if you have enough money, I've had several cases of my own,
and go after the police, it changes the whole ballgame.
I have seen it happen in my own case over a dangerous...
ticket for dangerous headlights,
and I fired back with my good lawyers and the police
ended up having five barristers working on it full time for over weeks.
Yeah. Okay.
So just to keep it... We need to engage the firearm community w-
from day one when we write legislation, because this whole new bill is
filled with things like, you should be able to get a part from overseas
in t- ten or twenty or thirty days. Apparently, the US State Department
takes months to grant any export permit, and then with the war in Iran,
if you can get anything at the moment, you're doing b****y well, to be quite blunt.
So I'm gonna say to you that we need to involve the firearms
community, people like Colfo, not just Colfo though,
from day one to write the legislation because e- otherwise
it gets done in abstract. How many people in this room own a firearms license?
Not many.
Apart from us, the submitters.
So if you're going to do something, surely you engage with the community properly,
not by, "Oh, we know best," when you don't.
I mean, we know the average police officer only fires about twenty
rounds in ongoing training per year, which is ridiculous.
Whereas a guy who, or girl who owns a pistol has to go to the club twelve times a
year and fire a reasonable amount of ammunition, otherwise you're not deemed to be
a true believer, shall we say.
So we've got to actually get real legislation.
No, we don't want criminals breaking in or doing crime, but
when Minister McKee went to customs and said, "How much cargo can
you effectively search?" They mucked her around for months.
Finally, they admitted in writing, at best on a good day, ten percent coming
in.
Check with Nicole McKee. Yes, I know she's a firearms owner.
She's a personal friend, too. I'll say that up front so there's no conflict of
interest here. I mean,
you know, we've got to have serious, good legislation.
Like, the stupid thing after the Christchurch shooting, banned semi-autos.
Within a month DOC was screaming they couldn't do animal control.
Oh, all of a sudden there was a hurried conference here in Wellington, several of
my friends were involved. Oh, magically they can have their semi-autos back to do
pest control.
I mean, what a horrible example of poor lawmaking
and ignoring, as we all know, we have a massive drug problem in this country,
but only drugs get smuggled in, no illegal guns.
Sorry, guys, I spent forty years in the trade.
I know what goes on in the real world.
Maybe it's not comfortable, maybe it's upsetting, but that doesn't make it invalid.
We've got to have real comm- You know, it'd be great to see, say, somebody from, or
two persons from Colfo involved from day one and other
shooting organizations, NRA of New Zealand, clay target, pistol,
so you actually get some real serious input, not we know best.
How can the police... What do they own? Five thousand firearms, maybe six.
The sporting community legally owns about one point three plus million.
Where's the expertise? Sorry, it doesn't lie with the police.
You like to think that it does, but the reality is very different.
And then you go to places like Scandinavia,
where semi-automatics are owned, Finland, all that,
very few problems. It's more a social problem, crime, rather than nasty firearm
owners. How many nasty firearm owners get convicted every year
for, for firearm crime? I'm not saying none do, but not very many.
Um, so what I'm gonna say is, I really want, and if you've read my submission,
'cause as forty years in the trade, I've seen all the c**p that comes up trying to
get import permits, have to get another import permit 'cause the first one ran out
of time.
You know, and the Iran thing gets worse.
And this also affects government ammunition, not just the private sector.
The government's bound by the same rules 'cause most of the ammunition the
government uses
is employed, imported by private firms like my previous company.
And not, not that, not just that company.
You know, I've imported mortars, everything. I, I've seen what goes on.
So you've got to have realistic legislation that reflects not some
idealistic dream that is never gonna happen, guys, and girls, sorry, women.
But we've got to be, have our feet in the real world, and I think the biggest
problem is with these committees,
and I'm not attacking you guys personally, but just up front, is that we've got to,
you've got to involve the sport and the industry up front,
because a lot of this legislation you've written, well not, that has
yet to be passed, I know,
is totally impractical. It doesn't work in the real world.
And we've got to have more real world legislation.
Yes, if somebody really steps out of line, yeah, slam them.
But let's, you know, have real world legislation.
All right. Now I've got a question from Mr. Tom Rutherford.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My, my question is,
I, I recognize the point you're trying to make, but the purpose of
having legislation go through the select committee process is
to ensure that it is then fit for purpose in the real world.
So
what more could have been done aside from what we're doing at present,
where the minister's drafted the legislation, we've gone out,
had the first reading, gone out to the public, open to submissions, and we're
literally hearing from people like yourselves today who say you
need to make improvements to it. I'm just a little bit unsure about what your angst
is that you're unhappy about.
All right. Well, what I'm really saying is the shooting community of
New Zealand, the legal shooting community, keep it simple, needs to be involved in
this specialist area of law from day one.
Sure, we have Minister McKee writing the legislation, but obviously it's
downgraded to various clerks, secretaries and other things.
So let's have one or two people from the whole shooting industry, or three, so not
very many, just a couple, involved from day one from the real world.
Like a, you know, a sixty-day import permit is nuts. So why should...
It shouldn't be in the legislation. Yes, an import permit categorically, yes.
But let's make the time frames realistic
Okay
... and things like that.
Can I ask you just one specific question?
Sure.
Um, you're a gunsmith or you trained as one.
Yeah.
Um, this, take your rifle in to get
repaired, and I've seen it.
Yeah, sure.
And observed it. The, what do you think
15 working... We've got a range of people who have said extend it to 15 working
days or maybe a month or what, what's your view?
Well, honestly, as somebody in the ex, ex of the trade, I've retired.
Yeah, yeah.
If, if... Well, okay, I'll take a classic Benelli shotgun, keeping it simple.
Yeah.
Like we were the importer for years. Okay?
Um, so
yes, we keep a range of parts, but there's like anything, like with cars or
anything, there's a big range of models out there, right?
Yeah.
So if we have to go back to Italy, we had to go back to Italy to get XYZ part,
it could, take,
uh... Then Benelli, Italy has to get an export permit.
Now, to be fair, the Italians are a bit smarter than the Americans.
They could usually get that in a month, in a month, sorry.
And then we have the big hurdle ever since, the Christchurch shooting,
unfortunately.
A lot of shipping and airfreight companies won't touch the products because they're
nasty, horrible guns, even if it's parts for a government gun, sorry.
This is the real world.
Yeah, yeah.
And so it can easily take-
Two, three
... a minimum of three to six months to get...
And also commercially, if I've got to do $1,000 worth of
paperwork to get one firing pin, for argument's sake, hypothetically,
it's not gonna be viable. If you tell a customer, "Sorry, if you want it done
extra fast, it's gonna cost you $1,000 plus other costs." 'Cause
airfreight, oh sorry, there's minimum costs, all this rubbish.
Well, not rubbish, but one of those guys. Yes, we need to have...
It can easily take six months, and that's not being negative to anybody, it's just
the system-
Right
... that we now live with.
All right. Hey, thank you for your submission this morning.
No problem.
Um, we've gone over time, but it's very good. Thank you.
No problem. Thank you.
Right.
Thanks for having me.
We're gonna go to Mr., Don Hammond by
Zoom, hopefully.
Mr. Hammond, are you there?
Good morning.
Yeah, good morning. We can hear you.
That's all right.
You've got five minutes. Thank you.
There's lots of people would like that situation to remain permanent.
Okay.
Um, yeah, look, thank you very much for the opportunity to present, and I just
wanna reflect on this, Dr. de Jong's comments before.
I think he made some very valid comments.
Um,
this select committee process is a big improvement on previous Arms Act changes,
where
even in my role as chair of a statutory body, I was prevented from
presenting to a select committee.
What we're seeing now is democracy in action, and, and we should,
protect and endorse that.
You've seen my submission, so I only want to emphasize a few points.
But I've been involved in firearms all my life, or most of my life, so I've got a
little bit of knowledge.
Most legislation in New Zealand has a shelf life of sort of 30 to 40
years before we get around to a complete review.
We've seen that with the RMA and lots of other things.
So as the previous submitter said, it's vital we get this right.
We, if we get it wrong this time, it could be 30 years before we get another crack
at it.
And at the moment what we've got is a mess because we've been tinkering with it for
the last 40 years. And unless you're a lawyer, and even if you are,
you probably still can't understand what the current law says.
I'd also note that, it's important for this bill to
embrace the Westminster principle of innocence until proven guilty.
And the, there has been a move towards the, the
opposite, a presumption of guilt, and we need to make sure that stays
out of this legislation.
In the explanatory note to the, to the bill, it records as a key theme
ena- enabling legitimate possession and use.
This is a critical principle.
There are legitimate reasons for Kiwis to have and use firearms, and we need a
system that supports this concept, not one that makes it overly
onerous.
We know that if it's too onerous,
firearms will simply go underground. How do we know?
The current, registration into the registry is nearly
60% populated,
and on current trajectory we will have about 1.1, 1.2
million firearms registered out of a known or agreed
population of 1.6. So there's circa 500,000
firearms, 30% of them, have disappeared from the system,
including a significant number of
recently prohibited or now restricted firearms, like semi-automatics.
We know that
making it onerous just prevents people getting involved.
Principle 4A states that possession and use of a firearm is a privilege.
I do not support this, as it is overly emotive and not
based in fact. Having a driver's license, which based on the
number of accidents is far more dangerous than a firearms license,
having a controlled substance license, having an explosives license, or even a
marriage license isn't considered,
to be a privilege. Why is, why are
firearms,
singled out as being a privilege? This is emotion. This is not fact.
Having a firearm for many people is essential to their employment or
feeding their family, and they will continue to hold firearms either
within the system or outside it.
And I note that you can get, you can lose your driver's license and then
apply for a work license if it allows your employment to continue, but there's no
such provision in, in the legislation for the same sort of
thing for a farmer over their firearms license.
The system needs a design that makes compliance simple and appropriate to
encourage people to be good citizens and be engaged, not making it
difficult so they disengage, particularly outside the urban
area, which re- reflects a little bit of the previous submitter's comments
that you need people-To understand what happens outside the urban
area and how firearms are viewed by the, shall we say, the average
Kiwi.
Finally, I believe the legislation should also,
create opportunities for buybacks.
The first buyback,
there was a lot of anger, and a lot of people refused to engage.
Many of those are now saying, "Actually, we're willing to engage." And while I
recognize government finances are squeezed, as, as are everyone
else's, the current cost of living crisis I suspect will bring out,
and on the basis of no questions asked, a whole lot of these more recently
prohibited firearms that we actually want off the streets by one,
one way... Excuse me. One way or another.
There's lots of other aspects I'd like to talk about, but time doesn't permit, so-
Okay.
If you have any questions.
Mr. Hammond, can I just... You-- The couple that you didn't cover, which
is the back of your thing, one is about,
New Zealanders that are living overseas who wanna renew their license.
Are you saying that at the moment, unless you turn up in New Zealand,
you can't get a license? Is that right?
That's what the Police and Firearm Safety... Uh, this is a personal situation.
I have a son living overseas who's got a firearms license.
It's up for renewal.
Uh, and Police and Firearm Safety are saying, "Well, unless you come back to New
Zealand for us to interview you, we can't issue one." This is-
And you can't do it via Zoom, like we're doing with you?
I would love them to explain why that's the case.
If this-
But that's not set in legislation, though, is it?
No, but this is where the legislation is breaking down because Police
and FSA are interpreting this,
as another means of preventing
legitimate use. He comes back once or twice a year to,
to go hunting. Now he's not allowed to.
Now, the other thing is you-- you're, you're saying that DOC has
access to the register. Is that enshrined in the
legislation or is that a practice?
Uh, it's been proposed in the legislation that other agencies can have
access to it, and the question has to be why, particularly
DOC.
You need a firearms-- You need a permit to hunt on,
on Department of Conservation land,
which is, is around the principle of you have to have
lawful reason for being on the land with a firearm.
Why DOC needs to see the firearms registry remains a
mystery.
Okay. Hey, very helpful comments on both those counts and
your other submission. Thank you very much, Mr. Hammond.
Thanks for the opportunity.
Right. Now, we've got, Mr. Goldberg.
I, saw him just coming on the screen.
Hi, everyone.
Can you see me and hear me?
Uh, yeah, we can. You're looking very good.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning, and thank you very much for the opportunity to present to you
today. I'm a competitive pistol shooter.
I've shot IPSC three gun, multi-gun, service pistol,
steel challenge, you name it. My sport of choice is action pistol.
For the past ten years, I held four New Zealand titles,
five official New Zealand records, and I was honored to represent New Zealand
internationally at the Worlds, bringing back home gold,
silver, and two bronze medals.
Despite stellar performance of New Zealand national team, we received zero
media coverage. That's why you're probably looking confused right now.
Anyway, that's a long way of saying I know a thing or two-
Try being a politician.
Yeah. It's a long way of saying I know a thing or two about, competitive pistol
shooting in New Zealand, and anything I say here is my private opinion.
I read the act,
I digested it, and I think it makes pistol, competitive pistol shooting
functionally impossible in New Zealand, and just let me explain why.
But before I even go there, gun control lobby may say, "Who cares about pistol
shooters?" Well,
I do.
Uh, I don't know any other sport where you can compete
internationally versus much younger opponents at the
ripe age of fifty-two.
Uh, as any other sport, pistol shooting brings
families and commun-communities together. But again, I digress.
I'll, I'll jump straight into the, into the point.
So imagine the situation. Me and my fiancée, we are both competitive pistol
shooters. B cat licensed. Uh, the pistol in question
is, registered to me in the NEIA
database.
So our two licenses are currently linked, so she can take that
pistol to the range, compete with it without me being
present, without breaking the law.
Under the new legislation, again, how I read and interpreted it,
if she is on the line competing with that pistol, and I, God forbid, go to
the bathroom, that constitutes unlawful possession of an endorsed
firearm, carrying a penalty of two years in prison straight away.
You may say it's a fringe case, but guess how we train our newbies,
our tyros, the, the new shooters. So we have club trainers
who use club training pistols that are
normally on the club armorer license, and club armor is sitting in the club
room. Again, same, same story. Two years in prison for just training
with pistols.
I'm just flagging a problem here. I'll, I'll cover the proposed solution in a
minute. You've got my sub-submission anyway.
Uh, traveling to multi-day events and competitions with endorsed
firearms,
there is no way we can store them legally overnight.
You can't store them in a car for more than an hour.
We all know that.
Hotel rooms are normally not, safe and
vetted space to store firearms.Let
alone endorsed firearms. And I can't give them to another B cat holder
who has a safe, because we already covered that, two years in prison, right, under
the new legislation. Yes, I can do the paperwork, but it takes days.
So if I need to store the pistol overnight and get it tomorrow, how do I do
that? There are no provisions in the, in the new law.
So what else happens? If I hand it over to someone to store
overnight, this legislation defines possession
in very fine detail, but what about the ownership?
The ownership is completely missing from this legislation.
The definition of ownership and the definition of carry.
So... And there are multiple flavors of carry.
So
what, what am I proposing? Again, you've got my submission, but just, just sort
of to, summarize. So I want
clearly defined short-term period when a B cat
license holder can hand over the endorsed firearm to another B cat license
holder without any paperwork or registry,
similar to A cats, having this 30-day period
when you hand it over and do nothing about it.
Uh, there's practical reason for doing that.
So clear definition of ownership.
Even though I hand it over to someone
and make those changes in the registry for a longer term,
I still want to decouple ownership from possession,
because that, kind of makes sense.
And also that dovetails into possession is a
privilege, which the previous speaker already covered.
I'm not gonna spend time on that. That is, that lo- logic of that state- it's a
political statement. Logic of that statement crumbles, under any scrutiny.
So, another thing that is very, very important is
unlimited power of chief executive.
Uh, in the fit and proper test, they can, uh...
For instance, they don't like the speech, so next time I'm not getting my license
renewed.
Uh, we need clearly defined criteria for fit and
proper without any personal bias in it.
And also my endorsement can be removed at any time by chief
executive,
and it doesn't state the reason for that removal.
Again, that should f- fall under the definition of fit and proper.
So in closing,
we are competitive pistol shooters.
We're probably the safest, most vetted, community
within the, the shooting community. We train relentlessly.
We compete under,
very, very strict rules. We face constant media bias,
but despite that, we, we are pushing the uphill battle.
So, so just to be clear, you're wanting similar provision for
storage of your go off site and overseeing someone
using it, a la, A cat where you could, for
instance, if you were traveling, a 30-day storage type stuff and more practical
rules around the use of those types of, items.
Is that right? Is that what you're getting at?
You, you nailed it. Yes, exactly that.
Right. Cool.
Because at the moment, at the moment, even though, we
have that pistol shooting exemption and endorsement
because we are competitors-
Yeah
... if we go and compete, we can't, we can't store firearms.
Fantastic. Thank you. Hey, thank you, Mr. Goldberg.
Very good, submission and very helpful. Right.
Thank you very much.
Cool. Now we're going into the Southern Lakes branch of New Zealand Deer
Stalkers Association.
Yes. Hello. David Ryder here. Can you hear me?
Yeah. Good morning, Mr. Ryder.
We've got, five minutes.
10 minutes, but we're already over time. But anyway, let's rock on.
Yeah, I see the, the clock behind you and the, the timeframe.
So first of all-
Yeah
... thank you for the opportunity.
Um, I want to start with, any questions from the committee
there in regards to, the on the ground boots that we have with the club
and the impacts that this past legislation has had, and any questions you may
have on what you'd like me to focus on, rather than regurgitating the submission,
which I'm taking as read. So-
Well, I did, I did ask the question earlier, to a member, a,
a submitter about the questions on clubs.
Do you think the club rules that we've got now, are fit for
purpose and are not overly o- onerous?
What we heard is once you've incorporated as a society under the
new rules, then the view was that they are,
they're reasonable. Is that your view as well?
Uh, I think our view is that a, a, a club should have its...
first of all be a recognized entity of such, whether it's incorporated or
charitable or whatever it needs to be, operate under a constitution, and then how
it fits in with the legislation, should be reasonably straightforward
process. I mean, from the shooting and range
legislation that we're faced with operating under, it's extremely difficult for us
to even get a range going. Um, we, we simply can't afford it, and it's
actually put us out of the, the, the ability to go and
have a range. We just can't do it under the current legislation.
Well, that's a different view from what we've heard.
Okay.
Um,
so what, what are you suggesting? Because obviously I think everyone
appreciates the value of ranges in terms of teaching
people good practices and also-
Yeah
... just better weapons ship. So what, what's your
prime beef at the moment?
Uh, prime beef is g- generally around the expense of trying to,
a- and get a range operational, particularly for our area, Queenstown.
Have you tried to buy land in Queenstown?
You can appreciate the cost of that is, is one intimidator.
Mr, Mr. Bailey has
So, and then the, the legislation around that-
Well, you need more friendly farmers.
Uh, there are, but they are very protective, as most farmers
rightly are of their own land and their own, operations on land.
Uh, we've had the benefit of the new health and safety registration clarifying that
recreational activities on their land don't constitute work safe practice breaches,
which is great, so that's been a win for us.
However, establishing a range, from a compliance perspective is
extremely difficult. Uh, the old ones which are there at the moment, they've got
existing use rights, they can carry on.
We're finding it extremely difficult, to even get a range going
basically 'cause the opportunity, the cost, the compliance around it
is, is quite onerous. Um, and it's just where we sit right now.
It's just not something we're able to do.
We do have options to, use-
Okay
... some existing ranges, but they charge $100 per
person for one go. You know? I mean, it's, that's just not affordable.
Right. We've got two questions. Talking of Queenstown, we've got, Mr.
Todd Stevenson.
Yep.
How are you, Dave?
Good, thanks.
Sadly, my, my small part of Queenstown is not big enough to establish a range on.
I apologize for that. Um, look, and thanks.
It's a very detailed submission. I just wanted to ask you about one thing we
actually haven't heard much about today was around fee structures.
Yes.
Um, obviously there's the idea of having a review, but yeah, can you just give us
kind of your, view on current kind of licensing
fees and, yeah, how you think that review should work and what... Yeah.
When, when you say review, review as your license is, is renewed?
Well, you know, this is actually the fee structure. Sorry.
Yeah.
So this is what the actual cost of a license will be, um-
Well, ideally we'd all love it to be free.
Um-
Yeah.
So, I suppose the, the current costs where they lie
seem actually affordable for most.
Um, it doesn't mean you get many vexatious applications and things like that.
People are committed to doing it. Um, we've already seen with the current
increases a reasonable drop in the number of people renewing as a
result of the fees, so any further increase in fees I don't
think are going to, serve the industry any good at all.
Thank you.
Or which is, of course, counterproductive.
Correct.
Hey, thank you, thank you, Mr. Ryder, that's very helpful.
Um, you've got a big submission, so, but a number of the points we've
picked up on, so, but the one about the range has very, been very helpful.
Yeah.
All right. Now, we're going to go to Mr.
Grant Fletcher, who's also via Zoom. And we've got Catherine Webb back.
Good. Um,
Mr.
Fletcher, are you there?
Apparently you are. We're re- reliably informed. Here we are.
Oh, good morning, select committee.
Good. We've got five minutes. You must be a lawyer.
Yep. I am a lawyer. I'm a barrister.
Yeah. With all those sign behind.
As was said, as was said in The Castle, one of the rich people's lawyers.
Now, there's a number of, critical points I'd like to raise
with you, and this is coming from a perspective of really having a practice
which is 50 to 60% firearms law over the
past few years.
The first and most critical thing is the imposition of timeframe in
relation to challenging the revocation or suspension of a
license. The current timeframe is 28 days.
The bill has a timeframe of 90 days.
If a citizen is charged with an offense which will take some
time to go through the court process, realistically a year, a year
and a half, and the suspension or revocation is based
on the, allegation, the criminal allegation against them,
effectively there is, they're unable to meet the timeframe that is
within the legislation.
So my solution to that is there's simply no
timeframe imposed for challenging a suspension
or revocation, or indeed filing an appeal against that.
What we often see is if we're filing an appeal in the district court against a
revocation, you file your originating application, a pro
forma application, and a memorandum to the judge saying
basically there's nothing we can do.
We are waiting for criminal or family court proceedings to resolve.
So in my view, the imposition of timeframes for
suspension and revocations need to be removed from the
legislation entirely. I can't see any reason for it.
The second issue, which is a subsidiary issue of that, is whether or not a person
can use firearms if suspended or revoked.
The, there's nothing in the Arms Act in relation to that, either in the
bill or in the present Arms Act. There is case law that
says that a person who is suspended or revoked cannot use a
firearm in those, that situation.
A simple solution to that is empower the regulator to
decide whether or not a person can use firearms while suspended or
revoked. That would be a highly situational,
decision, but I don't see there being an issue in relation to that in the
appropriate circumstances.
The third issue I want to raise with you is the 10-year,
disqualification that is in existence.
Now, what that means is that a person, if a protection order is made
against them, they are disqualified from holding or obtaining a firearms
license for 10 years,
even if the sus- even if the protection order is later discharged,
even if the protected person wants the,
protection order to be removed, even if the family court judge agrees
that the standard condition in relation to firearms no
longer needs to apply.
An example of that is that certain offenses,
disqualify, a conviction for certain offenses disqualify a person from holding or
obtaining a firearms license for 10 years.
The classic one is cultivation of cannabis.
The act doesn't-Draw any distinction between a person who grows
one of the devil's lettuce for their own use- ...
or a person who draws 3,000 for,
nefarious purposes. And I'm aware of
cases where people have grown a small amount of cannabis as a result of a
health condition, and that's because they can't afford a prescription for
medicinal cannabis, and a result of that, they're still disqualified from
holding a firearms license for 10 years.
And what I've said in relation to that is I'm not aware of any
situation in the law at all where a person who
holds a license of some kind is
unable to challenge it if their circumstances change.
A person loses their driver's license for drink driving, they could get a work
license. A person is on the treadmill of repeated driving whilst
disqualified offenses, they can get a community-based sentence to
cancel the disqualification. So in my view,
there should be an ability to revisit the
disqualification period if circumstances
change.
One area of particular alarm is that a qualifying offense for a
10-year disqualification is a conviction under Section 350 of the bill.
That is a $10,000 fine offense,
but if you are convicted of that for not registering an arms item
within 30 days, you will be disqualified from holding a
firearms license for 10 years.
So in my very respectful submission, that reference
to Section 350 as a disqualifying event needs
to be removed.
The final point I want to make, so you can ask me some
questions, is the review process.
The jurisdiction of this tribunal needs to be broadened very
considerably.
I do not see why, for example, if the FSA refuses an
import permit, your only option is either a judicial review of
that, and you're not gonna get any change from $50,000, or an
appeal to the district court, you're not gonna get any change for
$10,000, when there is a tribunal in existence who is
appraised to firearms licensing in this country.
So my submission would be that the review process, sorry, the review
board,
authority, whatever you want to call it, should be able to deal with any
decision of the FSA as a short, low-cost
alternative to court proceedings, which will in turn free up
judicial resources from both the district court and the high court and reduce cost
to the Crown.
And if I can't assist you any more, I'll answer any questions.
Well, very relevant, points.
We're-- I think we're very, very interested in what you've talked about.
Um,
so removing the challenge of suspension, the FP-
FBO's arrangements in section thirty- three
fifty. Just, so just to be clear on that
one, if you do not register, if you take over or
buy a, a rifle or something or a part,
if you don't register within thirty days, then you potentially...
Is that right?
Yes.
Is it that Ukrainian?
Wow. Okay. All right. Look, Grant, I don't think you
should take it from, anyone that we're not interested in what you're saying.
I think, yeah, very relevant.
Yeah. Some great examples.
So thank you for your time this morning. Yeah, great examples.
Thank you, sir.
All right. Right-o. Now we're going to go to Jeff Bryant
by Zoom as well.
Yeah, m- members, I'm gonna try and build in some time for a break.
Oh.
Well, we had a ten-minute break that we've looped through.
We're already behind schedule.
Yeah, so you need to keep people-
All right, cool
... on board.
A lot of interest.
Who, who have we got now?
Jeff Bryant.
Jeff, are you there, Jeff?
Have we got anyone else knocking yet?
Yes, yes, I'm here. Can you hear me?
Yeah. Rip into it, Jeff. We can hear you.
Five minutes.
Cool. Oh, hang on, I've got to click another button.
Right.
We've got five minutes with you. Good on you.
Very good. So, so I'm, I'm not here to,
to oppose anything in particular about it, although there
are issues in there that I, that I do, do not like.
Um, but I'm here to just promote the fact that licensed
firearms owners are probably the most, law-abiding but
most persecuted sector of our society.
Um,
we, um...
I think we've lost
Grant.
Our offending rate is less than half that of sworn police officers.
Um, yet
everything we do, everything that the, the bad element of firearm owners,
ownership is recorded down against us.
Um,
where are we going?
Now, now
the anti-firearms groups, they seem to push the
opinion that more laws equals better, a better, safer
community.
Um,
but more laws only affect the people that abide by laws.
And when you look at, at how law-abiding we are already, you're just--
we're getting penalized for the actions of other people.
We've had very good laws in New Zealand for quite a few years.
Um, what's lacking is proper administration of those laws.
Now,
a classic example of that is the Christchurch incident with when Brenton Tarrant,
if he was probably properly vetted, he wouldn't have,
he wouldn't have, been allowed to get into that situation.
Um,
we get blamed for,
the so-called straw buying aspect of firearm ownership.
Um, supposedly I've talked to a number of politicians who
have been told that seventy-five percent of firearms that get into criminal hands
come from licensed firearms owners.Now, that
figure's been spread by
some people who want a lot of firearms gone.
Now, how they come up with that figure, I have no idea because apparently about
75% of the firearms that
the police find in criminal hands have got no numbers on them anyway.
Um,
admittedly there are a few bad apples that do sell fire-- onsell firearms,
but every, every sort of aspect in life has its bad apples.
Um, the police said the likes of Ben McLean, who shot and killed his wife and her
lover.
Um, we had Graham Capill, the politician who-- Christian politician
who we'd expect would be an upstanding person, was a
pedophile.
Now, licensed... in this in-instance, licensed firearm
owners pay the price for a very small percentage of,
of our own who go wrong. Um,
now a comparison that I'll make with this is that,
boy racer scenario. A lot of boy racers are, when you see these
events going on in the news, they're running around in Toyota Corollas, little
Nissan Starlets, Nissans, Pulses, that type of thing.
Now, Grandma and Grandpa, they drive a Toyota Corolla.
Um,
but they don't get hassled for the actions of the boy racers.
So it's not the Toyota Corolla that's the problem.
It's not Grandma and Grandpa that's the problem.
It's the small percentage of, of Toyota drivers that are the problem.
Macking more laws for Grandma and Grandpa is not gonna solve anything.
Um,
and to care-- compare firearms licenses with driver's
licenses,
any small misdemeanor, as has been said previously, and our license is
gone. Now,
that's the reason that licensed firearms owners are so law-abiding is because we
treasure our licenses,
and without them,
a lot of our, passion and pastimes are gone.
Now,
there's instances where,
licensed firearms owners have had their firearms licensed
removed for minor traffic misdemeanors, which those
traffic misdemeanors won't even, affect the, the person's driver's license,
but they can-- you can lose a firearms license for them.
So there needs to be some, comparisons there looked into.
Uh,
loss of a driver's license doesn't affect vehicle ownership.
Um,
if you lose your license, your car stays in the shed until you've got your license
back and off you go, whereas with a firearms license, that's it.
You've, you've--
And as we heard before, there's a long time before you can,
reapply.
Now,
I, I agree with people before saying
that owning a firearm isn't a
privilege.
It, it is a right, as long as we're a law-abiding citizen.
Um, soon as we do something wrong, well, then you perhaps take those rights off us.
Um,
one thing that I am opposed to in this new,
in this new reform is the registration.
Um, I'll abide by it simply because I'm a law-abiding citizen, but I
won't-- I don't agree with it. Um,
the old system, the old registration system was abandoned back in the '80s because
it was clunky and didn't keep an accurate record and didn't prove,
to be of any use
in crime stats. Although it did solve one crime, and
that was the Arthur Allen Thomas case.
And we all know that it solved that crime by, by using firearm
evidence. Um-
All right. T- we're just running out of time, Mr. Bryant.
Sorry?
We're just running out of time.
Oh, okay. Well,
I wonder if we-- if you wanna ask some questions or do we wrap it up?
Just wrap it up. Have you got anything else you'd-
Oh, well, that, that'll do. Um,
I had a few-
Yeah
... couple other little bits. Um, but if you'd like to know anything, ask.
Right. Have we got any questions, members? No.
No, look, look, we, we've read, we've all read your submission, so that's
been very helpful.
Cool.
Thank you for that.
Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Yeah.
That's it.
Members, we're gonna have a five-minute break.
We've been going at it since nine o'clock.
So, can we just put the,
Waitakere on hold? So five minutes break.
We'll be back at, eleven thirty-five if that's all right.
Okay. All right. Cheers.
Yeah.
Okay.
We've got Waitakere, Mr. John Dyer.
Mr. Dyer, are you there?
Cool.
Okay.Mr.
Dye, are you there?
Yes. Can you hear me now?
Yeah. Good. Sorry, we hit a break. We've been going since 9:00, and we didn't have
one. So, sorry for that delay.
Yes, I, I caught that. Yes.
Yeah. Cool.
I hope, hope you all had your cup of tea and your toilet break.
Look, good a- good morning committee.
Um, now I'm representing today the, Waitakere Small Bore Rifle
Club, so I'm hoping to, give their perspective, if you like, and the
pers-perspective of other similar clubs.
So, first off, I'd like to support this bill's provisions, but with
some reservations and suggestions.
Okay.
Um, I entirely agree with the, Nicole McKee's
proposed changes, aiming to make the act, the Arms Act more
workable and bringing back trust to shooters.
I think that's a noble,
cause. So look, our organization, we started in
1952 in Kumeu. We've been around 74 years.
We've never had a firearms accident.
Um, how much safer do you really want us to be?
How much regulatory oversight do you think would be appropriate?
Um, because I can tell you, having to have the range inspected and
certified and, new incorporated society rules and
all sorts of things. Uh, we're only volunteers.
There's nobody working there permanently.
Um, I'm, I've been, 30 years on another club.
It's actually been closed down for six years trying to get all this nonsense sorted
out, and we only just, we had COVID, for instance, stop people
meeting on site, because of the
Auckland-Waikato barrier.
Um, so anyway, suffice to say, we seem to have a lot of
oversight, but, but what problem is there really?
Now, I'm gonna skip to the last item because for 10 minutes, I, the club was
particularly adamant this should be brought up.
When the 1983 Arms Act was brought before Parliament, when it was a
bill, the Police Minister reading out all the clauses said nothing
in this act was meant to prevent cadets from shooting at firearms
ranges. Now, we have cadets shooting at our range.
We have quite a few, different groups
and,
and one of-- So obviously cadets and scout groups and so
on, and, and if we have a have a go day, these are for people who are not licensed.
They're not old enough to be licensed.
Um, and so we have club firearms. Now, the Firearm Safety
Authority insists that every club firearm has to be registered in somebody's
name. So it's a case of handing out the straws and seeing who gets the shortest
straw. Uh, now, I suggest it should be in the name of the
secretary. Um, the police are required to keep a list of the
secretaries of every, formal gun club
in the country, so they have those names anyway, and you can imagine if we
get, our firearms registered in the name of a secretary, we could have an
AGM. He could be, just could be a new secretary next week.
He could die, in which case the police are gonna turn up at his widow's home and
say, "Well, hang on, hang on. Where are all these firearms that?" Uh, she's gonna
go, "I don't know. We don't have any firearms in the house.
I've no idea what you're talking about." So all it has to do is
instead of insisting that a person be responsible for the firearms, it
should be the secretary, which is obviously that, whoever the secretary is
at that time, who may well delegate that to somebody else.
Um, that would seem to me to make a lot more sense.
Now, in terms of health related extensions,
at the moment, you have to-- Well, we certainly endorse that.
Example is a p- a friend of mine, he's had a pistol
license for forty years. He's gone to his twelve required shoots every year
for forty years, without fail. He was recently
on his back in a surgery bed, having part of his spine
removed. Uh, didn't know if he'd ever walk again, didn't know if he'd live or
die. You know, making sure he completed his twelve shoots a year wasn't
the highest item on his agenda, or
even, thinking about it at all.
So police said to him, "I will let you off this time
with a warning." Well, you know, obviously there should be health related,
good, good health related reasons supported by, a GP or
similar.
Firearms Licensing Review Committee, that's fully supported.
It seems crazy that if you don't like a police decision, you can appeal only to
police or the district court at great expense, so we entirely support
that.
Driving history irrelevant to a firearms license.
You could be the worst driver in the world, but doesn't mean to say there's no
peer-reviewed medical evidence, showing that
you're any less able to, take care of your firearms
and the safety of them and so on. So, that
seems irrelevant. In fact, the person who, gotta be careful
what I say here, but, one of, one of the people who was doing the firearms
testing, coming around to see if your security was, adequate
and such, he just had his feeding ticket. So you know.
Uh, anyway, in terms of, police,
their role in this thing, I did a survey of a hundred game bird hunters, and
I found, over a two-year, over a, two year
period, I asked them if they,
their family or friend had had difficulties with getting their firearms
license renewed. Now, at that time, police were taking up to two years to issue a
firearms license
and some of those licenses the people have applied six months before.
In fact, I saw an article in the Tongariro Times where the local police
officer said, "Do not come to us six months in advance.
Uh, you know, only come up to us if it's in two or three months of when your
license is due." Your license is then,
because they consider you're not renewing your license, you're actually starting a
new one. That's how they looked at it.
So if your license expired while the police were still sitting in their inbox
eighteen months later, you had to then go and deliver it to a
friend who still had A, a safe that was appropriate and
his license was still current-And so what was happening was individuals,
and I know them, would have three or four people's firearms in their
safe. Now, if they were robbed, what a, what a bonanza for a, a
criminal, you know? And a lot of the guys were going back to the shops where they
bought the gun and said, "Look, look, my license, I applied for it in good time,
you'll have to look after it while I wait for this business to be sorted out."
We had one guy tell me, um...
Actually, when I say I did 100 hunters, 20% of them said they'd had a problem, they
themselves or family or friends. So I figured ov- that was over a two-year
period, I figured over a 10-year period at the rate things were going, it was gonna
be every hunter would either themselves, their friend or their family would have an
example.
So,
yeah, so, so I fully support this idea of license
extensions, while, you know, and, and making it clear
when somebody searches online to find out, has John got a firearms
license? Yes, well, he's in the process of it being reviewed.
Not, "Sorry, mate, we can't sell you any ammo, we can't sell you a gun," because
until such time as the police get their act together, you're just out of
luck.
So urgent renewals, you can get a passport in seven days, two
days at, in an emergency. I, I'm not too sure why a firearm sh- license should take
up to two years. Don't forget, some of these people, they're pest controllers, they
need a firearm for their, job. Some of them are,
you know, the, the home kill operators and that sort of thing, they have to have a
firearm for their job.
All right.
Um, permits the process. So my kind of
reading of the law, I might be wrong, is that gunsmiths have only got about a week.
Yeah.
When you take a gun to them, and if, if it takes them 30 days to get a
part, and keep in mind some of these parts no longer exist, Remington's no longer
in business, for instance. They have to manufacture it out of nothing.
Um, they need at least 30 days minimum, preferably longer,
to be able to take it, pull it apart, find out what they need, order the bits.
And if they ring you up and say, "Hey, I, I got it done within six days, can you
come and collect it tomorrow? 'Cause it's nearly seven days are up." And they go,
"Well, mate, mate, I'm flat out busy."
So 30 days surely is far more practical.
A new firearms regulatory agency supported,
particularly that their budget should be ring-fenced.
Now, what happened with the Aramoana case was they,
they went from the pre-'83 thing where they registered the guns to looking to
whe- whe- whether people were fit and proper.
But they ran out of, um... Well, had their money taken off them.
Police considered that in- investigating all these law-abiding people was a waste
of time, they wanted to spend the money on drugs
and so they said, they never got to David Gray.
They never got to letter G. So they-
Yeah, we saw-
He just got within the mail.
Yeah, we saw that in your submission.
Um-
Yeah.
We're just running out of time, Mr. Dyer. I've got one question.
Yes.
So do you got any other, points you may put?
We've read your submission, so it's a good submission.
Okay. Thank you.
All right. I've got Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thank you, John. And yeah, it is a good submission, so we've obviously all read
it. It's got a lot of details, it's great.
Just at the start, you seem to be inferring, you still
think that the rules and regulations around clubs and ranges is still a bit
too much bureaucracy. Could you just expand?
Do you think, do you think we need to go a bit further to make sure that clubs and
ranges can continue to operate, y- yeah, without
too much, bureaucracy?
Yeah, I think the key thing, like one of our, our ranges, the
one I've been on a committee for 30 years, that, they closed down because for six
years we're waiting for the guy sent to inspect it to come up with his report and
say, "Everything's fine and hunky-dory." Um, he had, health
issues, he wasn't meeting deadlines.
Um, I know another club where the guy rang, this is Morrinsville Fish and
Game Club, the, the, the chap in charge rang all the listed people on the police
list and said, "These are the people you can approach to get your range approved."
None of them were the least bit interested.
They were, had interest in pistol clubs and so on.
They didn't think that a, a pro- a club for kids and, and their
parents was, in their line of, interest.
That club's had to close down. Um, they've been there for donkey's years.
Um, but they've had to close down and now they're looking at relocating to the
Thames Valley Deer Stalkers Association, which is quite a drive from Morrinsville.
Um, so again, we've never had a firearms accident.
How much regulatory oversight do you need?
And, and ironically, the people come to inspect us, when I talk to a
lot of these clubs, you know, one club was closed down because they had
the police on it one day and y- y- you shoot from the, from the,
mounds down to the butts, right?
You shoot towards the targets, but, and, and that's the range, range standing
rules. But somebody on that police day thought it'd be a good idea to climb up a
tree with a submachine gun and start shooting in the opposite direction towards the
housing. So when they had their resource consent
reconsidered, every neighbor in the district was there
complaining, and the, council for the next 10 years insisted they could
only shoot one day a month, 11 months of the year, couldn't bring any friends.
And the police said, "Oh look, don't worry, we'll come along, we'll explain it.
We'll explain it." They never turned up.
And, and, you know, these, sometimes these are the very same sort of people who are
inspecting us. And we're thinking, "Well, you know, if your, if your
safety record was as good as ours, fair enough," but, but it often isn't.
All right. Thanks.
Hey, thank you for your submission this morning. That's very helpful.
I appreciate your time. Thank you.
Cool. Right. I see Mr. Lamb, Andrew Lamb on the
line there.
Good morning, Mr. Lamb. We're still in the morning.
Mr. Lamb, are you there? Andrew?
Unmute.
Oh, good on, we can hear you now. Right.
Good morning.
You've got fi- five minutes. International hunters.
Yep
Uh, no, pistol shooting predominantly.
Um, thank you for your time, and thank you for reading my submission.
There's just three things I really wanna talk about and three simple solutions
today. Um, firstly, family licenses, secondly, the application
process and timings, and third, the attitude of the
regulator. Um,
in terms of family licenses, with a rifle I can borrow my
dad's rifle to go... I've got a- a- a firearms license obviously.
I can borrow my dad's rifle, I can go hunting, there's no problem, there's no
issue. Um, but a pistol you can't do that.
Um, both my wife and I are competitive target pistol
shooters. Um, but a pistol can only be,
u- or transported and used by the person that it
relates to on its license. Um, you know,
if, for example, I needed to take my wife's pistol to the
range to do some testing, and she wasn't present,
that would be illegal and I'm subject to a substantial
fine and penalty. Um, that doesn't seem
kind of fair or equitable. Often, pistol clubs want to
be able to share, pistols,
train new people, and things like that, and certainly
some kind of family license would help.
Uh, what I would suggest is just a very
simple, family license. Somebody in the same
house, the same license, same endorsements, those li-
those pistols were able to be effectively shared, between
those people. Um,
so that's point number one. Um, point
number two. Um,
recently... I- I'm a relatively new, shooter and firearms
license holder. Um, I applied for my standard license
four years ago, and two years ago I applied for a
pistol endorsement. Um, so I paid obviously the full
fee, did the full application process four years ago.
Two years ago I had to complete the same 40 odd page
form, fill in, or pay a whole new,
payment application fee, and go through the whole
application process again. Um, but we-
Why? Why? Why? Why?
Well, that's what the rules state.
Um, because-
What, every two years?
Well, no, because I applied for the full license initially, you know,
a standard, let's say, rifle license.
Yeah.
And then when I went for my pistol endorsement, I had to go
through the whole application process again-
Right
... even though it was only two years later.
After six months I received my pistol endorsement, but
the expiry date for my pistol endorsement is
backdated to my original license.
Um, even though I've done the full application, I've paid the full fee,
I effectively only get two and a half years out of
paying a full fee. Um, so a simple solution
I think would be if you are applying for an endorsement after
you've applied for a standard license and you're paying the full fee, then
you should get either the full five or 10-year license period on your license.
Okay.
Um, and then the third point I wanted to raise is really
just the attitude of the regulator.
Um, they seem very heavy-handed and bureaucratic.
Um, while technically they're not part of police any longer,
a lot of the police attitude still prevails.
Um, and it, you know, it starts right with the very beginning of your
application on the first page. It goes on about how firearms are a
privilege.
Um, and the police seem to use kind
of any excuse to make it difficult for a firearms license holder.
Um-
Haven't you heard the, of the expression, "Hey, we're, we're here from the
government, we're here to s- to help"?
Yes.
That doesn't seem to apply in the firearms space.
All right. Hey, can I ask you just-
Yes
... I hear, we've heard your comments. Just conscious of the time.
Can I just go back to your very first one?
Yes.
Your family license, you're saying if, if, if you
own a rifle,
you, someone within your family, your immediate family, children,
a sister, grandfather, or just quoting
names right, uncle-
Mm-hmm
... can use, borrow their, their rifle provided
they've got a firearms license, but if it were the child they could use it under,
under supervision. But with a pistol, those same rules don't apply.
Is that, is it, am I totally correct with that?
Uh, correct, but it's even broader than that for a rifle.
Um, if I've got a ri- if I've got, let's say a rifle license, just to
make the terminology easier, I can effectively use and
possess,
yeah, any rifle from-
Right. Okay
... from anybody. Um-
Okay
... but with a pistol I can only use on my own-
Yeah, yeah
... a pistol that is registered to me.
So even my wife's pistol, if I wanted to do some extra
practice with it, I can't legally take it to-
Yeah
... a certified range and use it.
Yeah. No, we've heard, we've heard this before.
Sorry about cutting you off, Andrew, but, that's a very
relevant point, it's just you're re- reiterating another point. Right.
Members, any other questions?
Right. Hey, thank you very much, for your contribution this morning.
No problem. Thanks for your time.
Okay. Right. Now we've got, Mr.
Gerard McMullin
by Zoom.
Gerard? Gerard, are you there? Mr. McMullin?
Mr. McMullin, are you there?
He's coming back.
Yeah, apparently you're there, but you're, you need to unmute.
Bottom of the screen.
Yep
Oh, right
How's that? How's that?
Very good.
Five minutes.
Okay.
Five minutes, yep.
Can I see you? I can't see you, you can't, you can see me, so that's-
We can see you, though.
Yeah, that's kai te pai. All right. Hey, good morning.
Thank you for the opportunity to talk.
Um, I've been hunting since I was about seven or eight years of age, and still
actively hunting. I completed 48 years full-time, New Zealand Army
service, and that gave me extensive experience of using and managing
training on a broad range of firearms.
My military specialist training also saw me exposed to a number of very secure and
robust IT-based networks, and consequently, I've a good
appreciation of the characteristics that a network holding a database
such as the Firearms Register should comprise.
I'll speak very briefly to three particular aspects of the bill, including the
Firearms Register, age restriction, and vetting.
The Firearms Register, learn from history, that's what I'm saying.
Overseas experience is proving that firearms registers are exceptionally
costly to des- to design, to protect, and impossible to
maintain accurately. It's public record that New Zealand's already had a number
of documented breaches in connection to release of information from the
register. If a licensed firearm owner has just had all their personal
details, including firearms, released to the internet, the
implications are frightening. Who owns the risk? Who mitigates it?
And how is the risk eliminated? What's the plan for that?
Once accuracy is compromised, the register changes from being a
resource to a threat.
In summary, if the justification for establishing the register is that it
keeps the public safe, then that needs to be clearly demonstrated
on an evidence-based basis, because in my extensive
military career with the many thousands of firearms across the Defence Force
and associa- and the associated firearms registers that went with them,
they never kept anyone more or less safe.
They merely recorded what, where, when, and with whom.
So I say scrap the register if it cannot be clearly
demonstrated that it keeps the public safe,
because that was just justification for establishing it, and stop wasting
taxpayers' money.
Age restriction. Most of New Zealand's current successful international racing car
drivers all started out in go-karts while still young children
guided by parental and men- and mentor supervision.
By the time it was appropriate to meet the national licensing driving regime,
they were better prepared than most to sit their full car license, and
arguably were safer drivers than most.
The same applies to young people being exposed to firearms.
Parents and mentors know when a child is ready to take the next step, not the
government.
Many children will progress to achieve excellence, be that in the competitive
shooting arena, as soldiers, farmers, or as
hunters, and like the young racing car drivers, are generally far better
prepared to succeed at an earlier level having been
exposed during their formative years.
In summary, the current age of 16 to obtain a firearms
license should remain unchanged.
As a segue to my last point of vetting, I use the analogy again of
vehicle drivers. Licensed drivers may misuse a car as a weapon
to injure, commit, and to, to commit crime and maim.
They are able to get their license at 16, the same age as for a firearms
license, and yet car license applicants are not subjected
to any level of vetting to determine if they are a fit
and proper person.
For the nation to be satisfied that they are safe when firearms are being used,
the nation must have confidence that the national authority has the appropriate
measures in place to ensure that all licensed firearms
owners have been vetted and each deemed a fit and proper
person.
It's pretty simple, really. It just rests with the national vetting
authority to ensure the vetting process is appropriate, that
the list of points to check is finite, clear,
measurable, and objective. That is, not
subjective or open to bias or opinion or view,
and that every applicant is subjected to the vetting process and
must pass it.
If an applicant is granted a license without a vetting process being
correctly followed at every step, then the vetting authority, not the
individual, has failed the nation.
Referring back to my point on the Defence Force Firearms Register just for a
moment,
perhaps all those Defence Force personnel and the broader public of New
Zealand were safe from any Defence Force owned firearms being
misused, because Defence Force personnel are all, to varying
levels, vetted to be fit and proper people in the first
place.
Summary: let's not have another March 19 tragedy.
Get the vetting process correct and apply it without
error.
Thank you very much.
Well, very well said. Um, I've looked around members.
Um, we haven't got any questions, but I think, that's been very
useful to listen to that, Mr. McMillan.
Thank you very much.
All right, cool. Right, now we're going on to,
Mr. Jim Henry, who's coming in by telephone. Mr. Henry.
Hello there. I'm un- unmuted, apparently.
Mm. Yeah, you're fine. We can hear you loud and clear.
Oh, good as gold. Thank you. Yeah, um-
Five minutes. We've read your submission. It's a good one.
Yep. Righty-o, then. Um, and, and expanding on the magazines a
bit, if there's an endorsement required for a magazine, if you buy a
new one for $55, you have to pay another $204 for an
endorsement.
For a magazine.
Because it needs a new endorsement. Mm.
For a magazine, yep, under Section 27.
However, if it's only a 10-round magazine, Section 26,
your, a person possesses a standard magazine, holds a firearm
license, doesn't even need an endorsement for a
pistolI think that the endorsement for the pistol
should be enough to own the magazines for that pistol, whatever
capacity.
So just
if it, if it's got... If it, if you're, you're just talking about pistols here,
aren't you?
Yeah. Well, well, yes. Yes, but a 10-round pistol magazine
can be owned by just a firearms license holder.
So if you go and buy a magazine-
Don't have to have the pistol-
... a pistol magazine for, for less-
Yeah
... for nine, 10 or fewer, bullets for a pistol-
Yep
... then that's fine.
Yep.
But if it's more than 10, you have to apply and pay your 250
bucks.
Yep, yep, yep. It's an a... You have to have it.
Not only that, because it's got an endorsement, it'll end up being, recorded on
the register. Um, for instance, I have one pistol with
large capacity magazines, which are standard magazines and have been since 1935.
Um,
I would have, something like 10 or 12
magazines registered for that pistol, so that'd be 10 times as
much detritus on the, register-
So technically-
... than the firearms
So just trying to understand the, logic.
So if it, just take me through this slowly.
So, uh-
Yeah
... if, if you're buying a magazine that's got 10 or fewer bullets,
then it doesn't matter.
Yeah.
You don't need... You have to still register that though, don't you?
No.
No. But okay, so if it's over 10-
You only have to register, you only have to register high capacity ones, yeah.
Right. So if it's over 10-
And, and it's pointless anyway because,
yeah
... if it's 11 or more, you have to register it.
Yeah.
And technically, if you've got-
Yep
... 10 magazines that would cost you 2,500.
Yep.
Okay.
Technically.
Well, we'll get-
Yeah
... we'll ask the officials that.
Try and deal with that. Mm.
Before-
Oh, yeah. And the, and the other thing I'd like to mention is the, is this
short-term storage that actually, William Goldberg
mentioned there. I, go away to shooting competitions, and
what we've usually done is
put the p- p- put the pistols and our, or our rifles in the lockup
of the person who is running the competition.
Now, that is actually now unlawful.
Yeah.
We have to have a, it's either a seven-day or a
30-day,
requirement, just like with, with rifles, where-
Yeah
... the, the registered items can be held for that period without
notifying anybody. Because goodness sake,
the, they, as they, as long as they're with a person with an endor- the
appropriate endorsement on their license for holding pistols,
then they're fit and proper people to have them, aren't they?
Yeah. All right. I think we've heard that point, and I think we've all picked
up on that. That's really helpful.
Right.
Yep.
Any more questions?
Righty then.
Mr. Henry? No.
No, it's good feedback.
No. Uh, thank you, Mr. Henry. That's been very helpful, just particularly around
the, magazines and stuff. That's really good.
One little bit I would like to say is that there was a, a article on
RNZ, yesterday, the government data being held by
unvetted, vetted third parties.
Excuse me. What?
Um, data management-
Of government
... held by unvetted third parties, and then that's obviously applies to
government departments, like the register.
So that, that was government data, is that what you said?
Yeah.
Right.
Held by un, un-
Yeah.
Thank you.
Held by... Righty. Yeah.
All right.
Righty. Bye-bye.
Thank you. Good to talk to you, Mr. Henry.
No trouble. No trouble.
All the best.
Thank you for, thank you for listening.
Okay.
Right. Bye-bye.
Right. Now we've got, attorney, Bruce. Mr.
Bruce, are you available?
Apparently you are. Mr. Bruce, we're looking forward to hearing from you.
Mr. Bruce, are you there?
He needs to accept.
Oh, you have to accept it. There's an invitation, Mr. Bruce.
You have to push the button.
Has he accepted it? No.
Accept, accept, accept.
He's there. You're in now.
All right. Mr. Bruce, are you there?
You probably need to do the mute as well.
Can you hear me now? I'll try again.
Yes, we can. How are you? We've got five minutes with you.
We've read your submission.
Very briefly. Um-
What, what are your big points?
Okay. My, my key points are around the firearm registry
database.
Yep.
The rifle range, sustainability.
Right. Good.
And the firearms auctions.
Okay. The last two would be very useful.
Okay. Um,
very briefly, my background is I'm the national editor for the Antique and
Historical Arms Association.
We saw that.
Also been a previous Mountain Safety Council, safety instructor.
I've also worked in IT for 40 years.
In terms of the firearms database, I'll briefly mention that from my
perspective, the database will be scrapped
within 10 years, and I don't say that lightly.
For the, the, the way that I'm using it at the moment, I'm seeing duplication of
data, I'm seeing, incorrect data being stored,
and I, I don't see the way that the, the systems and the
operations of the, the database is
effectively alienating older, older users, that are alienating people
without computers. And
the, the problems will be compounded
that the longer this database goes on.
So I feel that the, the way the database has been applied has been incorrect,
and...
Sorry, I get my... The, the f- The, the way the database has been implemented in
such a hurry without a proper pilot being, being utilized,
the, that, you're, you're gonna have major, major
problems long, long term, and you will need to, to tidy this up at some
stage.
Okay.
The next point I make is around firearms auctions.
Yeah.
Um, the restrictions after the 2019 Firearms or the
Arms Act-It puts such a- an intense,
administrative and physical overheads on the auction
providers that we are seeing auctions being canceled.
Now, the important thing about the firearms auctions is that they're actually a
clearing house for estates, that they're a clearing house
for,
for people to change their collections,
and these, these auctions are run on a very, very structured, very, very
tight, tightly secured environment.
But because of the overhead, because the costs involved now-
Mm
... we are seeing previous auctions are now being canceled.
And the risk that you take is that if the gun shops
cannot accept the firearms being, being offered to them, that
if, if the, the restrictions around the fire- the registration
database-
Can you be, can you be a little bit more specific about what, what, what's in
particular is making the auctions really difficult?
The, the costs involved or the, the administrative cost in
terms of increased registration, increased, increased
police presence, additional costs involved in security in the
environment, and
the,
the, the, the security of the firearms inside the environment have been increased.
And you are also seeing,
be- because of the registration coming in place, the,
the, the, the firearms registration has caused a backlash against
the police and the, the, the need to register firearms.
So we have seen a decreased number of people wanting to buy at the auctions,
and that has affected the ability for people to move, or particularly
estates or, or to, to be able to, to buy and sell firearms.
So you, you are s- looking at a severely decreased,
range of buyers inside the, the auctions.
So presumably what you'd do if you had a collection from your
grandfather, you'd take it down to a local gun shop,
would you? Gun dealing shop and s-
Yes, you can do that. But, but the, the, but the...
As an example, three of the auctions in Wellington region alone
that were previously running, we, we're processing
6,000 lots a year.
Right.
Now, those three auctions are now canceled, so that's 6,000 lots,
6,000 items. Now, of those, maybe a third are firearms,
and we're not just looking at the processing of firearms, we're looking at the
processing of ammunition and accessories.
Yeah.
And if, if the estates cannot easily process these,
these items, w- where do they get sold?
Because the, with the,
the-
So what's the solution?
... the registry.
What's the s- what's the solution, Mr. Bruce?
I, I would be suggesting that we go back to the, the previous pre,
to pre- 2019 rules because you, you've
never ever had any incidents at, at a firearms auction.
This is the, the...
You've taken a safe environment, you have massively increased the overheads in
terms of administration and,
costs to, to run that auction,
and the organizers have said, "Mate, it's not, it's not worth our while doing it
anymore." And the auctions that are left behind now are,
are severely limited in their scope of what they, they can take on,
and they're only taking on a limited number of the items that they're being
offered.
And so y- the risk that you take is that, an executor who does
not understand the gun laws-
Yeah
... will then sell those guns to s- an unregistered person.
They're also limit... We've, we've...
I've also seen physically the, the problem of an estate
where they had ammunition from the, from the deceased
that, that the auctions would not take on, that they won't take on.
An example about ammunition.
Okay.
You can't sell a bundle of, a bag of mixed ammunition anymore.
Everything has to be listed and, and registered.
Okay.
And so the overheads in terms of processing that,
but also the, the PCAT rules, the PCAT
magazine particularly, have doubled your admin- administrative overheads.
So for example, if you've got a, a Bren gun or a Thompson or whatever,
you can hold the Bren gun on a CCAT, but you've got, then got to have a separate,
processing administration for each magazine that goes with that
gun.
Okay. So, what was your last point?
My last point was that
we should go, we should scrap the tw- 2019,
auction restrictions.
Okay. Yeah.
But basically, you, the, the, there was no need for those restrictions to be put in
place.
Yeah. All right, cool.
Uh, any other points, Mr. Bruce?
Um, the
rifle ranges need to be seen as a community resource.
Yeah.
They're very, very safe. The, they are the proving ground, if you like.
So firearms safety is not about theory, it's not about laws.
It is, it is, safety is generated by
the, application of those by experienced shooters and, and, and
the rifle ranges. And if, if you have got rifle ranges closing down-
Yeah, we, we have-
... long term you're gonna have a decrease of security, of, of safety.
You probably heard, you probably heard we've been focusing on that a bit.
Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you very much. Any other questions from m- members?
All right. Hey, thank you for your time this afternoon, Mr. Bruce.
Thank you. Thank you all.
Right. Now, um-
Mr. Chair, Todd Barnes.
All right. We're just skipping through.
Todd Barnes. Yes. Mr. Barnes.
What's it?
They haven't done location, so you won't be able to-
Mr. Barnes, are you there?
Yeah, just think I'm-
Unmute.
Um, Mr. Barnes, you're muted, so you have to unmute the mic.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Can you hear me now?
Yeah. No, sir, here. We can see you.
Yeah, hang on. I'll just start that. Can you see? Is it, is it going now?
No, can't quite see. Oh, there you are. You're in the car. We can see that.
Okay. Yeah, I am.
So I'd like to thank you guys very much anyway for a start off, for a-as the,
government of today. And, and, so I'd very...
And Nicole McKee, you know, like integrity and,
honesty, everything, you know, like y-you've, really made
the day for me. Um, and, to, to previously what
we have seen and, you know, like, just, I just
want to embrace with you guys to say thanks very much for actually taking on
board and actually bringing back what feels like somewhat democracy.
So, so I'll just do a little brief, bit about myself.
So Todd Barnes, I'm formerly from Western Southland, moved up to Canterbury, which
I live up there because of, my family, situation,
so, and then my position in the recent times as sort of like a
real family, mainstay there and my situation.
But formerly, as you would probably seen in my paper submission that
I've put in, I was one of the ones that grew up in the...
So I was born in 1970, so my, my family was like right
involved with, deer recovery,
setting up of, deer, farming for into the future, which we
still have now today. So and then, like very much around
firearms right from those early days where there was no storage whatsoever.
We went on to storage, and so we've think right through where the storage to me is
a fantastic idea. So the sharpening up on that is, to me,
has been a great idea. But some of the things that I'd like to just touch on around
the storage was so, like, something that's happened, very
directly to us was, a de- a deceased.
So,
and the keys around that was so, that
be-become a bit of a problem because, even
though, so I'm gonna refer, it was my-myself and my father, he...
And so I knew that the, the firearms were to go to me.
So, and of course, when he, he had died, he had actually said around where the
keys, he had put them, and, he would slightly
move them a little bit here and there at different times.
So, if it wasn't for someone else knowing where the keys were,
I would've had to rummage through the whole house, and so that meant going through
my stepmother's house, which she has, I gotta say she
has dementia problems. So that, that would, would've been an absolute for
me, was that I was gonna have to rummage all through the house.
So if someone had... I mean, so we've gone from so
much trust way back in possibly the '60s, where we used to have a t- a
school bus driver driving, y-you can read this, where a school bus driver would be
driving to school with a, a firearm, and they'd shoot a deer on the side of the
road, just when they were trying to, eradicate them, and take them to
school on the bus with the kids in the back.
You know, so much trust then to where we can't even trust our own
family members, where we know they're trustable.
And so anyway, so that there, if it hadn't have been for someone else
sort of knowing where the key was, I would've had a whole lot of trouble.
So I knew, I sorted it out, and I sorted it out from there.
Anyway, the other thing around the storage is, you know, like, so where we
live and, a absolute point is at
times you might h- I believe that this should
be,
a-accommodating where someone might have, say, for
instance, that they could explain the situation why.
They may have things all stored in place.
In their gun safe there could be like, say, a .22 with
subsonics, and it's basically not ready to go.
It might be the rifle, the magazine, and the bolt.
So everyone might go, "Ah, no, no." Well, I, I know of
incidents and where it's pest control, and we look at the
2025, and so it's like often you might go into your
house or something, there might be a cat, and I know this to be the case.
This was the case. It's like, if I have to rummage through three places to find
bits and pieces, by the time I get to shoot that cat, it's a real
threat to New Zealand, native indigenous species,
that it's gone. It's like, it's too late.
So now the, the next one I would like to touch on is the, the t***a or
the, the heirloom or a- and the exemption.
So to me it's like when some of these things here have been in families and handed
down for succession and succession and succession, and it's like
some of us have had firearms. Like, so I'm nearly up to forty
years now, firearms license, and I've never had any, you know--
I've got no-nothing against me whatsoever.
So after forty years you've got these heirloom, things.
So you would potentially need to apply for an exemption.
So that to me that seems kind of ridiculous.
It's like where is the trust in me? It's like I've got to
put my trust in everybody by exposing everything and
background, background check testing, whereas like, it's like
if we look at some of the, the politicians that have been in the highlight in the
last couple of weeks, what have we been able to background?
They don't like their background being looked at.
So and then if we move on to penalties, and so the penalties, and so I,
I'm just gonna touch back to my Western Southland district where I came from.
Some of the things when I back down there and I talk to some of the people there,
friends and so forth, some of the things that are of real concern, so like I worked
in the forest industry from a very early age back in the '90s and
so to now. So we've had a, a, the, the sell-off of the forest
and so forth. And so I, I can remember being confronted with
a, you know, pulling up to a gate where I formerly would have been able to just
drive back into the '90s there and, and even later.
I could formerly have driven in there. A gate up there with a, a sign up there.
I knew that there was an easement there or a walkway there.
And so there's a sign there, and it's got like cameras and everything, "You will be
prosecuted," and so forth. I was actually looking to just tramp up that
road. So as it-- So I thought, "Well, that's the...
What, what do I do here?" Phone number there, so I rang them.
And so then they said to me, even to walk in there I needed a,
a, a, a, um-A walking, a wa-walking permit which
could take up to a week. I'm like, I could not believe it.
So that, that's part of, of, penalties and
boundaries. Boundaries around...
So when, when our state forests have been sold off, especially in a place like
Western Greenland, where it's been all gated off.
So the forest has been excluded for, to everybody and so they still have a
permitting system. But what we've got is a whole boundary edge right round,
and sometimes you've got outlying department, dock
land inside a forest. So that's almost access-
inaccessible in cases because there's no real easy
way to get there. So it, it's just become a bit,
to me, it's become a real gray area.
So when I go back down there, if I wanted to drive there and I'm thinking, "Well,
you know, I used to be able to get in here, freely access and I could get a
permit." There's still permit systems. Yes, there is.
They can be limited to who can go there.
Yeah.
But now if I go in there and I think, "Oh, look, I'd like to just be able to come
up around there."
All right. Yeah.
What happens if I was to get caught just over that boundary line?
So I think in the boundary lines there should be some, some way that
we should say that... And penalties.
Can I just touch on this? So the penalties for if we were, say, around
the registry, if there's a distrust, if people have a distrust in the registry
and they're a bit reluctant to go into it, and they go, "So whatever." And if they
were to go, "Oh, well-"
All right, Mr-
"... and I just told a little mistruth-"
Mr. Barnes.
"... as they said." Yes.
Hey, yeah, that's cool. Hey, no, we, we understand your point.
Um, and I know what you mean about a cat.
I've been trying to shoot a cat on my property too, and by the time you get your
rifle out you can't shoot the d**n thing.
Yeah. Exactly.
So, we, we share the moment with you.
Hey, hey, thank you for your contribution, and joining us
this morning from your car. And hopefully you're going hunting at some stage.
Thank you very much.
All right.
Thanks.
Hey, thanks, Mr. Barnes. All right. Cheers.
Yeah.
Right-o. Now, we've got Mr. Colin Anderson.
I see him there. How are you? Good afternoon, Mr. Anderson.
Good afternoon.
We've read your submission.
Thank you. Thank... Um,
right, thank you for the opportunity to speak to you.
Um, I'm a licensed firearm owner and prior to
2019 I held an E category endorsement.
Since 2020, I've applied for and received two further
endorsements, two reviews of one particular endorsement in the
renewal of my A category license.
I've been fit and proper five times.
Each time, my wife, referees, and I have been subject to the same
process of answering repetitive, and in some cases, meaningless
questions in personal interviews.
There is no credit for my previous 54 years of being a licensed
firearm owner with a clean record.
I'm being made to feel like a criminal.
This is a common feeling among those going through renewals within the last five
years.
I request that the register be abolished.
New Zealand had one previously and it was abandoned at the police request in
1980. They stated it was expensive,
inaccurate, and more importantly, did not help to
solve crime.
For similar reasons, Canada abolished their register in
2012, as they found most guns used in crimes were not
registered.
I doubt New Zealand is any different.
In my opinion, the Firearms Authority in its current form
is not fit for purpose for the following reasons.
Licensed firearm owners have little faith in the security of their
information.
Already there have been data breaches and reported illegal use of the
database.
The application and registration systems are difficult to access and
use,
and phone ca-contact is inconsistent because every time you
speak to a different person who has a different perspective
with inconsistent rulings.
I also understand there's been a 70% turnover in staff since
2022.
Something is seriously wrong with the organization.
The Firearms Authority needs to be separate from the police before both
organizations can start regaining trust within the firearms
community.
Police have shown significant incidences of overreach within the last
five years.
I support the Firearms Authority being independent and responsible for the
formulation of proposed regulations for government debate approval.
Police would then be the enforcement arm, as with their current
arrangement with the NZTA, where they enforce the road rules.
Police will still have access to be able to confirm if an individual had a
li- firearms license and the appropriate endorsements.
I understand Police Defense Force and Corrections staff are going to be
exempt from having to pass, apply for, pass, and maintain a
firearms license.
The recently published police report stated that recruits had about six
hours of tactical training,
and I understand that serving officers have only two or three training days a year
on the range.
In my opinion, this level of training is insufficient for somebody who
is frequently required to carry firearms in unpredictable and
stressful situations, especially when you compare it with that of the
requirements for B endorsement holders.
Some submitters have made a big deal about firearms license being a privilege.
However, a firearm is a tool.
Okay.
An inanimate object that cannot do anything on its own.
Hammers, knives, golf clubs, cars, and chainsaws are also
tools, but these items can also be u-used
to injure and kill someone.
If we only focus on the tool, we don't address the cause, t-
what caused Tarrant to murder 51 people in Christchurch.
The tool didn't make him kill those people.
He chose to break the law and use the tool to commit his crime.
Okay. M-Mr. And-
Sorry, just conscious about time.
Um, can I ask you a specific question, unless you've got any other very
s- important aspects you wanna talk about?
Uh, well, only just one other, which was, like, since the burdens and
restrictions have been placed on li- licensed firearm owners, there's been a
marked increase in gun violence in New Zealand.
Right.
Many press releases indicated the perpetrators were unlicensed or gang
members, so we need to address the criminal behavior problem.
But yes, carry on.
Okay. So item two, page nine, change items made for personal
use to be sold only through licensed businesses. This is in your submission.
Yes. Yes.
You, you said you believe this is too restrictive and excludes
family or associates from purchasing these items.
Please add any licensed firearm owner with the
appropriate-
Appropriate endorsement. Correct.
So
just so we understand the context of that comment, you're saying let's
say you wanna sell a, a state or
even buy o-o-
an item from your father, whatever,
d-does that have to go through a, through a shop?
You have to do it through an intermediary. You can't buy it directly.
Is that right?
Well, the... My, my understanding is the personal use would be,
what I was looking at was the customization of guns, or
some particular a-aspect for the, you know, your own use.
But my understanding from that is that it had to go through a dealer
or a licensed dealer before it could be disposed of.
Um.
Well, hopefully someone else is gonna pick up on that point-
Yeah
... when they make submissions. I'm looking around the room here.
Um, I've got a question from Ms. Jenny, Jenny-Anson.
Yes.
Um, thank you, Chair. I just want to check if I heard right.
Did, did you say that it wasn't a military-style
semi-automatic prohibited weapon that was responsible for March
15th? It was someone who was breaking the law.
Is, is that what you said?
Well, I... Sorry. Uh, well, in, in my, in my understanding of the
definition of from the old ECAP days, a military-style,
um-
No, just a prohibited weapon. So I'm talking about the type of weapon used.
Okay, yeah. Well, semi-
You, I think you, you referred to it as a tool
... or fully automatic.
You referred to it as a tool.
As, as a tool. He, he used that as a tool.
He-- The gun didn't make him commit, kill those people.
He chose to, to kill them, but he u- chose to use that gun
as the tool.
Well, would you accept that that particular tool would be far more deadly and, in
fact, specifically designed for killing people?
No, it's not designed for killing people. No, I don't accept that.
Okay.
Um, I, I think if y-you have to look at, you know, like pest control-
What is it designed for if not that?
Well, pest control. If you, you...
For killing herdans-- herd animals, you need the
rapid fire capability to get effective and humane
killing.
And that was what it was designed for, is that what you're saying?
Let's-
The purpose of the design is that.
Okay. I think we can bring this to a close.
But I am interested in your, the issue about
selling guns without having to go through a dealer.
But anyway, hey, thank you for your contribution, Mr. Anson.
That's been very helpful. And-
Thank you for the opportunity.
Right. Now we've got Andrew Napier
here. Mr. Napier, we're looking forward to hearing from you.
There you are. How are you going? We've seen your submission.
We've got five minutes.
Anything that's new would be really helpful.
You've gone.
Clearly nothing new there.
Mr. Napier, we've lost you. You were
there.
Right. Another, second go.
Kia ora. Apologies for that. I know.
I reckon I tell you, sir, how confusing these things must be. Um, so yeah.
My name is Andrew Napier. Um, I have been a, a sporting shooter for
a lo- over twenty years now. Um, I've been running Manukau
Sporting Rifle Club based over in Auckland, for the last, ten
years as president as well. Um, I have a few points I
wanna run through. I'm happy to answer any questions if I have time at the end of
my submission.
Um, one thing I want to stress is club importance, which I do see,
presented in the Arms Bill. Um, I would love to see further collaboration
with clubs and ranges from the, independent, authority
that will be taking over from Firearm Safety Authority.
Um,
as mentioned by previous speakers, clubs and ranges have a massive,
community sense to them. Um, my ri- my rifle club is exceptionally
busy right now. Um, and the sheer amount of people we get along who are
interested in using sports, sports, using clubs as an environment
to learn their skills and hone their craft, not only as a first-time shooter,
but also as, an experienced shooter who wants to, establish different
positions of shooting, and partake in other sporting events as well.
We've had a few of our shooters, compete on an international level representing
New Zealand in doing so. Um, so for that brings me a strong sense of pride and it's
something I would love to see FSA, collaborate more with.
Uh, to that effect as well, I'd love to see greater education, drives within
these clubs and ranges. As I mentioned before, the range officers
and, committees within these ranges, are exceptionally
experienced individuals. Um, and being able to use those
connections and leverage that network to drive education on upcoming changes,
and improving safety of overall clubs and ranges would be incredibly insightful
and helpful, and also build greater, ro- greater morale within the
overall,
the overall experience of the shoot.
Um, I would love to see an improved application process.
Um, at the moment I appreciate that there is a few, hurdles that folks need to
jump through and I, have to jump through, and I absolutely understand that from
the perspective of having references and, and crosses and, checks and
balances. That being said, as a, as a, as a president of a rifle club,
I see so many members coming along, joining the sport, shooting the,
the targets and-At that point, seeing this massive
roadblock ahead of them when it comes to the application process, it is quite
daunting. Um, I have gone through that myself a couple of times and,
for someone who, hasn't gotten the full understanding as to whether or not they
want to do that or not, it can be quite a, quite a task for them.
So an improved streamlined process, again referring to my earlier points, if
there is an opportunity to leverage club and range connections with that as well,
that's always gonna be a benefit.
Um, I do agree with the, the proposed change for, premises,
of secure location and storage of firearms.
Um, as a previous student, working, and studying in, in Waikato,
being unable to, to shoot during that period of time was quite hard for
me. Uh, and so thankfully my, my father has, whilst as a license holder at the
time, I was able to leverage that connection and store his, my, my
firearms with him. Um, but it was still prohibitive for me as a, as a student
flatting in Hamilton to be able to-
Right
... to, to, to actually store my firearms there.
Um, I agree with, regular consultation with the firearms community as well
based on the, on the proposed bill.
Uh, I also agree with, the pest control endorsement changes as well.
Um-
Okay
... pest control is a huge amount of work for, New Zealand and the flora and
fauna industry-
All right
... and being able to promote that as well.
I have a couple more points if you don't mind, Speaker.
Okay.
Um, so I agree with renaming, dealers license to a business license as
well. I think that's massive in terms of encapsulating what the overall industry
involves.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I also agree with the independent, chief executive to ensure that
there is that, that representative era that doesn't include
police oversight. Uh, and I also, as a final point before I open any questions,
I agree with formalizing, a red flag system, with regards to the
information sharing from that, chief executive industry and also information
sharing for any other, concerns.
Uh, we as, as firearms license holders, we are fit and proper people.
That does not mean to say that we should not be held to the same scrutiny if not
higher scrutiny as a result.
Okay. Um, that's all good, but we- we're trying to work out what we need to
change. So, you say, "I support standardizing
magazine capacity at 10 rounds for A category
firearms.
This balances safety with utility for hunting, sport, and animal control."
So what is...
Just take us through what the situation is at the moment,
because, this is just for rifles, not for pistols, which are a different
kettle of fish.
Yeah, exactly right. So, I'm not a pistol license holder, so I'm not here to
speak to that. Um, so
standa- a standard round of 10 rounds is what I would expect for,
for A category shooting. Um, so when you go out into the field with an A
cat license, that is what I would expect to see in that.
I know that at the moment there are some restrictions when it comes to five round
magazines for some higher level calibers.
Um, personally I've-
What, what, which one are the five? Which ones are limited to five?
Um, I can't speak on that. Um, I don't know the exact calibers.
Um, as a shooter within the 22 realm, all I know is the 22s, which are point two,
which would be 10 rounds.
Okay. So you, you're just saying we should just move to 10 round
for all-
A round
... fi- rifles in effect?
No, that's not what I'm saying, no.
Yeah. A, A cat ones. Okay, cool. Right. Any other questions?
No, I think we're there. Hey, thank you very much, Mr. Napier.
Very helpful this morning for that, that session.
No worries.
Cool.
Right. Now, we've got Mr. Gary Elms, is
it? I hope that's how we say it.
Mr. Elms, are you there?
Can I just ask why my name-
Yes
... got in skipped? Mine put down 12:05.
I've been here for 45 minutes, and my name hasn't been called, and I noticed
that it's way past me. So my name is Glenn Soroka, and I was put down for-
Oh, we didn't know you... because we had you down for a Zoom.
No, no, no, I'm here. No, I didn't-
We had you down. That's why we skipped over you.
Right.
So you wanna come join us now?
Oh, yes please.
Yeah.
Is it all right if I, um... I've got some supplementary documents.
Yeah, just over there. Yeah, cool.
Thank you.
We had you down for a Zoom.
Oh, I don't know why that happened because I-
So that's why nobody asked for you.
Oh, right. Okay.
Okay, let's rip into it.
Um, I'm S... Yeah, my name's Glenn Soroka. Thank you for letting me speak.
Um, I'm 62 years of age. I've had a firearms license since I was, 16.
I, in my, recent years, I designed one of the, and, and
designed and invented a, and manufactured a extremely
high-end falling block single shot rifle that was comparable in car terms to a
Rolls-Royce. They sold for $50,000.
I'm presently not able to hold a firearms license, in part because of Section
22H1B, and, I've got some concerns about that
that I'd just like to share with the committee.
Um, in part one of the main concerns of course is that,
anybody that's subject to a final protection order is pro, you know, disqualified,
as you've heard. I've heard Grant Fletcher talk about it.
I've heard Jim Smith talk about it this morning.
One of the, one of the key points that no one seems to have pointed out is that the
judicial process that's relied upon to, deny or to,
for you to end up in that position as a result of, a, a Family
Court proceedings, which are civil proceedings, not criminal.
Secondly, the, Family Court has a completely different, set of,
evidentiary rules to what the criminal courts have.
I've just recently been through a, um...
As a result, my ex-partner's a barrister and she's highly litigious, and she's put
me through the wringer, and th- this can happen and it does happen frequently.
I'm just happen to be someone that's a little more articulate and a little more
aware and prepared to talk about it.
Um, in, in any event, the, the process in the Family Court,
you might be aware there's a thing called the any evidence rule, that, that
rule is often abused and it allows for quite,
shall we say, suspect evidence to be relied upon to enable a protection order to be
made. Um, the, I can speak with some authority
'cause I've helped a lot of people over the last 10 years.
The, Family Court, judges
are making protection orders when the law that is
presented in Section 11 and Section 9 (2) of the, of the Family Violence Act
is not remotely close, to being, adhered to.In
my supplementary documentation, I've included the list of
behaviors that were, alleged against me, which,
identify, which sh- clearly show that none of
those behaviors are listed as, as appears in
Section 11 of the Family Violence Act,
and there's no oversight. And I can...
Another thing I can share with you is that I've spent hours looking on the,
Decisions Online website. There are no,
appeals that I've managed to find of a lay litigant against a fam...
against any judges in New Zealand for the last ten years.
There was not one incident of s- a lay litigant filing an appeal,
whether it be in the family court, the criminal courts, the civil courts, getting
an appeal over the line. There is a policy within the judiciary of New Zealand that
prevents anyone from getting an appeal over the line.
Do you-
Anyway,
th- that's, that's the br- the broad overview of where things, have, in a
sense, resulted in what I would say is a gross injustice,
against, just people that want to go out and hunt and, and, and for,
for reasons that aren't justified.
But in particular, I just would like to, read out, something to, you know,
if we've got a, a couple of minutes-
Sure
... which just encapsulates s- further in,
inconsistencies. So, I'm here to assist the committee by
identifying a significant inconsistency in the consequences faced
for those that have a final protection order made against them in the family court,
and those convicted of criminal intimidation under Section 21 of the
Summary Offences Act. The difference in consequences for firearms
owners is extreme, and the outcome depends solely on their family status,
whether they were in a family relationship or not.
The difference in the consequences faced for a firear- for a firearms owner is
stark, and the law as it stands produces outcomes which are discriminatory,
disproportionate, internally contradictory, and
unjust. If you are in a family relationship and have a protection order
made against you, even if it's based solely on what is referred to as psychological
abuse, you are automatically disqualified from holding a firearms
license for ten years. If you've been with your partner for ten years
but not liv- not live with them in the same house, you're only subject to a
prosecu- to prosecution under Section 21 of the Summary Offences
Act, often for behavior more abusive than that relied on in the family
court, and you will not face any automatic disqualification of your firearms
license.
To compound the issues of discrimination and unjustness, the behaviors
relied to make the protection orders based on psychological abuse
are much, much less violent when compared to other disqualifying criminal
offenses in Section 21H. The issue is not simply theoretical.
It has practical consequences which frequently results in loss of livelihood,
the ability to hunt for food or put down injured or sick animals.
To criminalize those that use a firearm for such low-level offending affects both
public confidence and legal coherence.
The sexual-- The central issue is 22H imposes an automatic ten-year
prohibition. However, protection orders may be made on the balance of
probabilities, and they may be made solely on findings of psychological abuse
that do not meet the definition of Section 11 in the Family Violence Act.
They do not involve-- They often do not involve threats of violence, physical
intimidation or any firearms-related conduct.
In my case, my case is one of those, and I, I've attached those, the
list, in the, in the documents I've, filed with the court.
At the same time, behavior prosecuted as intimidation under Section 21 of the
Summary Offences Act does not result in any equivalent firearms prohibition,
even though the conduct may be more serious and must be proven beyond a reasonable
doubt.
Do we need to hear any more, or have I made my point?
Um-
I think you have, and we've heard-
Right
... a number of things.
I have-
May we ask you questions?
So I'm not sure if you were here earlier, but there was a barrister who spoke about
the idea-
Grant Fisher.
Yeah. And so-
I know him, I know him quite well. Yes.
Great. So I mean, his suggestion was basically having an opportunity where you
could appeal, yeah, basically within, within the ten years,
before the, yeah, before the ten years came up, you could actually kind of have a
right of appeal to get your license back.
Yeah.
Is that something you think would be useful?
I, I don't, I think-
How would you like it dealt with, I suppose?
I think, I think that 22H needs to go.
I don't think, I don't think that what I've just pointed out, I just don't think
there's any... If you look at it with a fair mind, there's no way that
22H (1) should stand because the...
A, it's, it's, it's, it's in a civil jurisdiction.
It's not criminal when you compare it to all the other, the, the con- conduct.
If someone commits an act of sexual violence or physical violence within,
within, as a, as a breach of, sorry, as a, as a, within the Family
Violence Act, there's opportunity for those people to be prosecuted in civil, in
the criminal jurisdiction. Okay?
So if the act is so violent, like you, someone might mash their ex-wife's head into
the concrete, that's not gonna-- that's unlikely to be dealt with in the family
violence jurisdiction. It's gonna be prosecuted by the
police. I don't see any reason why 22H needs, 22H (1)
should be there, in, in this, as a, as a, as a civil
offense with spurious evidentiary and judicial
processes to, to i- impose such a
draconian thing. Ten years is a long time,
and I can't make my rifles in part because of that.
One other thing I just want to quickly... You wanted something new.
This should be new. I've actually taken my case to this, the High Court.
The High Court is confused about, there's
tension between Section 157 and 159 of the Family Violence Act,
which allows you to apply for a dispensation in the Family Court.
And then on the other hand, and that's still exis- in existence, and on the other
hand, there's 22H. And when I took my case to the, Family Court,
the judges were confused about 22H and, and Section 159.
Okay.
So there is already an a- an ability to, have your
case heard in the Family Court under Section 159 or 157.
So
the, the, the only, the, the big difference with 22H is h-how long you have to wait
before-
Right
... you can actually, uh-
Yeah
... reapply.
Yeah.
But of course the only-
We've heard, we've heard the issue that you've got t- ninety days.
Most people can't meet that, and then we've heard the issue that,
unproven or, um-
Uh, allegations or where it's been confirmed that the allegation
was totally misrepresented, the people can't get their license.
Gotta wait the 10 years. So we've heard both those points.
The other thing, the other... The last point is if you don't wanna...
If, if they, if you wanna leave 22H (1) in-
Yeah
... then why not have a carve out for psychological abuse?
Okay. So yours is around that psychological-
So that, if that's, that's the, the...
That would be the-
Okay
... the last point. But anyway.
Thank you very much. I'm sorry, that-
That's all right. Thank you for-
That's what, that's what we're here for, so.
Thank you.
Right. Now, I've... We've got Gary on the,
video. Looks like you got a wonderful background from H*- Hong Kong or somewhere,
Gary, but anyway.
No, no, it's, if you, if I duck out of the way, you can maybe see the, the
Sky Tower there. But, um-
Oh. See a bit
... it's, it's all, it's, it's all a complete facade.
Um, so yep. Um, I'll take my submission
as read. Uh-
Yes. Okay
... and in doing so, I acknowledge that it is rather long, at
100 odd pages. So if you have read it all, thank you very much,
and hopefully you didn't entirely lose the will to live before you got to the end.
Uh, what I've tried to do in the submission is to
make sure that what I'm, what I'm saying is evidence-based and not just
me rocking up with a bunch of reckons.
Um, so the, you know, part A, part A, part B, part C,
is provides the context and the evidence for the positions that I'm
taking in, part D onwards. Um,
primarily what I'm wanting to do here is to give the,
the committee the opportunity to ask questions, but just to quickly recap,
on the key issues, and there is a lot of material that I've, that I've
raised i, in the submission. Firstly is around granularity.
There's, there's, there's way too much granularity in,
both in the existing legislation and even in, in the new
proposed bill, that goes way beyond, the point
where,
it, it adds any safety. We're well into the point of diminishing marginal
returns. The second point is, is around legitimacy.
Um, public safety relating to firearms in New Zealand relies
very heavily, heavily on a level of voluntary compliance from the
firearms community. That voluntary compliance relies
on certainty and goodwill. Um, and both of those
are, eroded when there are
complex definitions that people are having to deal with, when there's an
adversarial relationship with the regulator.
Um, and this legislation, proposed legislation, you know,
starting with the, the opening line that ownership of a firearm is a privilege.
I understand the intention behind that, but it is a very...
It's a statement that sets up an adversarial relationship between the
regulator, and the firearms community.
The third point is that
every additional piece of complexity that we add
to the firearms regulation comes with a cost, comes with an
opportunity cost. It means we're spending money on,
absurd things like, prohibited ammunition and
other things that, that really add nothing to, to public safety.
And we're taking away money that, that could be spent on, you
know, TSOC intelligence or family violence prevention or,
you know, various other things that, that minimize,
violence in the community. So there is always an opportunity cost
to this, additional complexity.
The final point that I wanna make, and, and this is not to take away from the good
intent and the, and the intelligence and so on of the people that have drafted the
legislation, is that, is that this bill is shambolic
in terms of, how it's been drafted.
It's not internally consistent, it's contradictory,
it's confusing, and it really needs to be, has,
have a, a real radical simplification lens, put across it.
So I'll stop talking now and-
All right
... give the, the committee the opportunity to ask any questions.
Well, the submission looks like a good PhD, thesis, so- ...
that's what crossed my mind. But I do have a question from Mr.
Todd Stevenson.
Thanks, Gary. And thanks, Gary, for all the effort you've gone to. Don't worry.
Um, we are reading all 104 pages. Don't worry.
And officials down the back were smiling when you sent it.
Yes.
I, I hope you... they didn't go to sleep. They've definitely read it.
I'm on page 67 of your submission.
Whoo.
Um, this is just a... I just wanna get your thoughts.
You're talking about actually the, the firearms registry here.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and I think what you're basically arguing, but I want you to kind of
articulate it, is that because it isn't, it isn't
really targeted and focused, that it's actually not gonna be that effective, and
that it's, that it's also got some issues obviously with, people,
people's confidence in it, et cetera.
What are you suggesting is the way to fix this up?
So what I would suggest, and I know that the, the suggestion has been
raised a number of times about abolishing the registry altogether, but I, I, I
think we'd all acknowledge there's not a lot of political appetite to go that far.
I think that the, the, the registry needs to
be,
simple. Focus on a few simple things
that we can keep track of. So whole firearms, firearms
actions, that are trackable, they've got, they've got serial
numbers on them, and then just look to track the
significant events such as, you know, complete change of
ownership-
Yes
... and, and not get, not get s****d into, you
know, fine grains. So if we compare it to what we're doing with motor vehicles,
we track motor vehicles, we don't track carburettors, right?
Yeah. Yeah.
Um, so, so I would say keep it really simple.
If you look at-
Yeah. Good point
... if you look at the portion of the legislation that is, that talks about the
registry, even the first two clauses are contradictory, right?
The first clause says, "We're gonna track these items," and then the second clause
says that, "Actually, we're gonna track everything that,
that the legislation covers." So, so there's a, a lack of internal
consistency- ... which is actually symptomatic ac- throughout the whole
legislation, I think.
All right. Hey, thank you, for a very comprehensive, I
think it is the most comprehensive, thesis,
and, so it's been very helpful having that.
Um,
so-
And we like the illustrations too, by the way.
Yes. Yes. Very good. All right. Hey, thanks, Mr.
Elms. Right. Now, members, we are,
we're gonna have our
half an hour lunch break in 10 minutes.
What I might do is give us 15 minutes.
Yeah.
Grab a sandwich.
And then we'll be back. Um, do you mind just leaving people in this? Yeah.
All right. I, I wanna deal with a bit of much better chair.
I'm actually... There's some, I'm obviously letting the roll call-
Well, they want to have their say, so it's very important
All right. So we'll see you back at 1:05. All right?
Well, they didn't get it last time.
1:05. Okay.